We aimed to estimate the prevalence and factors associated with parents’ non-
intention to vaccinate their children and adolescents against COVID-19 in 
Colombia and Peru. We performed a secondary analysis using a database 
generated by the University of Maryland and Facebook (Facebook, Inc). We 
included adult (18 and over) Facebook users residing in LAC who responded to 
the survey between May 20, and November 5, 2021. We included 
sociodemographic characteristics, comorbidities, mental health, economic and 
food insecurity, compliance with mitigation strategies against COVID-19, and 
practices related to vaccination against this disease. We estimated crude (cPR) 
and adjusted (aPR) prevalence ratios with their respective 95%CI. We analyzed 
a sample of 44,678 adults from Colombia and 24,302 from Peru. The prevalence 
of parents' non-intention to vaccinate their children and adolescents against 
COVID-19 was 7.41% (n=3,274) for Colombia and 6.64% (n=1,464) for Peru. In 
Colombia, age above 35 years old, compliance with physical distancing, use of 
masks, having economic insecurity, anxiety symptoms, having a chronic 
condition or more comorbidities, and being vaccinated were associated with a 
lower prevalence of non-intention to vaccinate children and adolescents against 
COVID-19. In Peru, gender, compliance with physical distancing, use of masks, 
having economic insecurity, anxiety symptoms, having a chronic condition or 
more comorbidities, having had COVID-19, and being vaccinated were 
associated with a higher probability of vaccinating children against COVID-19. 
Living in a town, a village, or a rural area was associated with a higher prevalence 
of non-intention to vaccinate children and adolescents against COVID-19. About 
9 out of 10 parents in Colombia and Peru intend to vaccinate their children and 
adolescents against COVID-19. This intention is associated with some factors 
which are similar between the two countries, as well as other factors and 
variations among the different regions of each country. 

About 9 out of 10 parents in Colombia and Peru intend to vaccinate their 
children and adolescents against COVID-19. 

In Colombia, being between 35 and 54 years old, adherent to maintaining 
physical distance, using masks, having economic insecurity, having 
symptoms of anxiety and comorbidities, and being vaccinated were 
associated with a higher probability of vaccinating children against COVID-
19. 

In Peru, being female, an adherent to maintaining social distancing, using a 
mask, having economic and food insecurity, having comorbidities, having 
been vaccinated, and having had COVID-19 was associated with a lower 
probability of not having the intention to vaccinate children. On the contrary, 
living in a town or rural area was associated with a greater intention not to 
vaccinate. 

Despite good general acceptance of vaccination against COVID-19, the 
health authorities of each country must propose individualized strategies 
depending on the context if the vaccination campaigns in this population group 
are to achieve their objectives. 

The most cost-effective strategy for controlling the COVID-19 pandemic is to 
achieve global vaccination coverage of at least 70 to 90% (1). Vaccines against 
COVID-19 are not only safe but have also been shown to reduce hospitalizations, 
the use of ventilation, health care costs, mortality, as well as viral transmission (2–
5). Although initially there was controversy about vaccination in the child 
population due to the relatively low incidence, severity, and limited spread of the 
disease in this age group, it is currently considered essential to achieve herd 
immunity (6). Similarly, it is necessary to ensure the return to regular school 
learning and prevention against severe cases in children, as well as long-term 
consequences such as post-COVID-19 syndrome (7).  

In October 2021, the Food and Drug Administration authorized the BioNTech 
vaccine for emergency use in children from 5 to 11 years of age (8). Although this 
vaccine remains under surveillance and continuous monitoring, it has been 
demonstrated to be safe and effective in this population (9). Nonetheless, 
investigations at a world level have suggested that some parents reject 
vaccination due to false information reported by the media (10,11), leading to 
uncertainty regarding the safety and efficacy of the vaccines (12). 

Although 9 out of 10 parents in Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) intend to 
vaccinate their children, there are factors associated with the non-intention to 
vaccinate (13). The proportion of parents who do intend to vaccinate their children 
is encouraging despite being one of the continents with the highest degree of 
misinformation and low adherence to the control recommendations of the 
pandemic (14). However, this vaccination intention varies among the regions of 
each country, and each country has factors associated with its social 
determinants or its health systems. 

There are differences among the regions of Peru concerning the intention of the 
adult population to be vaccinated against COVID-19 (15), being lower in older 
adults (16). A study in Colombia showed lower vaccination acceptance in adults 
than in the Peruvian population (17), with important variations among its regions 
as in Peru (18). These results suggest that the intention to vaccinate in different 
countries varies according to the sociodemographic context and age (19–23). 
Likewise, fear, socioeconomic conditions, and institutional situations can also 
intervene in compliance with vaccination (24,25). 

Therefore, while some studies have evaluated the vaccination intention in LAC 
countries (13), there may be variations within these countries that warrant 
strategies to achieve adequate coverage in children and adolescents. Therefore, 
the objective of the present study was to evaluate the factors associated with the 
intention to vaccinate children and adolescents in Peru and Colombia and the 
variations of this intention among the different regions of these two countries. 

We performed a secondary analysis using a database generated by the 
University of Maryland and Facebook (Facebook, Inc). Both institutions designed 
a survey to assess sociodemographic characteristics, comorbidities, mental 
health, economic and food insecurity, compliance with mitigation strategies 
against COVID-19, and practices related to vaccination against this disease. 
Since April 23, 2020, this survey has been carried out daily in more than 200 
countries and in the primary language of the territory. The sampling frame for the 
random selection of participants included daily Facebook users over 18 years of 
age from a particular region and country. The selection of the surveyed 
participants was random based on the sampling frame that was recalculated 
daily. If a Facebook user refused to participate, another was randomly invited 
within the sampling frame. Participants could only answer the survey once within 
an eight-week time frame. This survey has been used to develop previous studies 
(26), and the survey methodology has been described in greater detail elsewhere 
(27). 


We included adult (18 and over) Facebook users residing in LAC who responded 
to the survey between May 20 and November 5, 2021. We excluded participants 
who did not have the variables of interest, who did not have children, those of 
non-binary gender, and those over 54 years of age. We excluded participants 
over 54 years of age to reduce the probability of not exclusively including parents 
of children under 18 (Figure 1). 

Outcome variable: The outcome variable was parents’ non-intention to 
vaccinate their children and adolescents against COVID-19. 

We evaluated the parents’ intention to vaccinate their children and adolescents 
against COVID-19 using the survey question: Will you choose to get a COVID-19 
vaccine for your child or children when they are eligible? This question has four 
possible alternatives: yes, definitely; yes, probably; no, probably not; and no, 
definitely not. Subsequently, we dichotomized the variable considering the first 
two alternatives as to the parents’ intention to vaccinate their children and 
adolescents, while the last two were considered non-intention. 

We included the following sociodemographic variables (the survey question 
related to the study variables and the categories considered for these variables 
in the study are shown in parenthesis): gender (What is your gender?; male, 
female), age (What is your age?; 18 to 24 years, 25 to 34, 35 to 44, 45 to 54), 
educational level (What is the highest level of education that you have 
completed?; 
university 
post-graduate 
degree 
completed/university 
completed/college/pre-university, secondary school completed/high school (or 
equivalent) completed, primary school completed/less than primary school/no 
formal schooling) and area of residence (Which of the following best describes 
the area where you currently live?; city, town, village or rural area). Town was 
defined as a populated area with fixed boundaries and a local self-government; 
city was defined as an important or a large town; and village was defined as a 
group of houses and other buildings, usually in the countryside, smaller than a 
town. 

Participants self-reported the following comorbidities (survey question: Have you 
ever been told by a doctor, nurse, or another health professional that you have 
any of the following medical conditions?): asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) or chronic bronchitis or emphysema, cancer, diabetes, high 
blood pressure, kidney disease, compromised or weakened immune system, 
heart attack or another heart disease, and obesity. We created a variable that 
grouped comorbidities in yes or no. 

We also included self-reporting of being a smoker (yes, no), having had COVID-
19 (yes, no), and having been vaccinated against COVID-19 (yes, no). 

The community mitigation strategies included were physical distancing and mask 
use during the last seven days. We defined physical distancing as when a 
participant reported having intentionally avoided contact with other people at least 
at some point in the last seven days (survey question: In the past 7 days, how 
often did you intentionally avoid contact with other people?). In addition, the use 
of masks was defined if a participant reported wearing a mask in public at least 
at some point during the last seven days (survey question: In the past 7 days, 
how often did you wear a mask when in public?). 

We assessed food insecurity with the survey question: How worried are you about 
having enough to eat in the next week? This question had four possible answers: 
very worried, somewhat worried, not too worried, and not worried at all. We 
considered the first three responses as food insecurity. 

We defined economic insecurity using the survey question: How worried are you 
about your household’s finances in the next month? There were four response 
alternatives: very worried, somewhat worried, not too worried, and not worried at 
all. We defined economic insecurity using the first three responses. 

We evaluated anxiety symptoms using the survey question: During the last seven 
days, how often did you feel so nervous that nothing could calm you down? This 
question is part of the Kessler Psychological Distress Scale (K10), and the survey 
has five response alternatives: all the time, most of the time, some of the time, a 
little of the time, and none of the time. Therefore, we dichotomized the variable 
considering the first four alternatives as to the presence of anxiety symptoms. 

We evaluated depressive symptoms using the survey question: How often did 
you feel so depressed that nothing could cheer you up in the past seven days? 
This question is part of the Kessler Psychological Distress Scale (K10) and has 
five response alternatives: all the time, most of the time, some of the time, a little 
of the time, and none of the time. Therefore, we dichotomized the variable 
considering the first four alternatives as to the presence of depressive symptoms. 

We downloaded the databases in Microsoft Excel 2016 ® format and imported 
them into the statistical package Stata/SE ® version 17.0 (StataCorp, TX, USA). 
Then, we performed the statistical analysis considering the complex sampling of 
the survey and the svy command. 

We performed a descriptive analysis using absolute frequencies and weighted 
proportions with their respective 95% confidence intervals (95%CI). We used the 
Chi-square test with Rao-Scott correction to perform the bivariate analysis 
between the independent variables and the parents’ non-intention to vaccinate 
their children and adolescents against COVID-19. Two generalized linear models 
(crude and adjusted) of the Poisson family with a logarithmic link function were 
used to estimate the factors associated with the parents’ non-intention to 
vaccinate their children and adolescents against COVID-19. Crude (cPR) and 
adjusted (aPR) prevalence ratios with their respective 95%CI were estimated. 
The adjustment for confounders was carried out according to an epidemiological 
approach based on other studies (13), after evaluating the collinearity of the 
associated factors included in the final adjusted model. We evaluated the 
possible collinearity of the associated factors included in the final adjusted model. 
A p-value less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant in all the 
analyses. 

All participants gave their informed consent before answering the survey. This 
study analyzed a secondary database that collected data without identifiers and 
did not violate the integrity of the participants. The database is not open access; 
the authors of this study achieved access after obtaining a signed agreement with 
the University of Maryland. 

We analyzed a sample of 44,678 adults from Colombia and 24,302 adults from 
Peru (Figure 1). 

In the Columbia study sample, 55.44% were female, 33.19% were between 35 to 
44 years old, 53% had completed secondary education or less, 60.88% lived in 
a city, and 10.78% reported smoking. Regarding prevention measures, 89.45% 
and 92.27% had complied with physical distancing and the use of a mask, 
respectively. Food insecurity was reported by 72.49%, and 86.61% reported 
having economic insecurity. In addition, 35.82% and 42.51% described having 
anxiety and depressive symptoms, respectively; 65.27% of the participants did 
not report comorbidities, 47.53% were not yet vaccinated against COVID-19, and 
35.79% had had COVID-19 at some point. In Colombia, the prevalence of 
parents' non-intention to vaccinate their children and adolescents against COVID-
19 was 7.41% (Table 1). 

In Colombia, the regions with the highest prevalence of parents´ non-intention to 
vaccinate children against COVID-19 were Amazonas (14.95%), Putumayo 
(13.72%), and Vichada (12.96%), while the lowest prevalence of non-intention to 
vaccinate children against COVID-19 was in Vaupés (0%), San Andrés and 
Providencia (0.27%), and Bolivar (5.33%) (Figure 2a). 

We found statistically significant differences for age, level of education, 
compliance with physical distancing and use of a mask, economic insecurity, 
anxiety symptoms, presenting comorbidities, and having been vaccinated (Table 
2). 

In the adjusted regression model, we found that age groups between 35 and 44 
years old (aPR=0.77; 95%CI: 0.66-0.90; p=0.001) and 45 to 54 years old 
(aPR=0.78; 95%CI: 0.65-0.95; p=0.012) were associated with a lower prevalence 
of non-intention to vaccinate children against COVID-19 compared to the age 
group between 18 and 24 years. Likewise, compliance with physical distancing 
(aPR=0.55; 95%CI: 0.49-0.61; p<0.001), use of masks (aPR=0.71; 95%CI: 0.65-
0.78; p<0.001), economic insecurity (aPR=0.72; 95%CI: 0.65-0.89; p<0.001), 
anxiety symptoms (aPR=0.87; 95%CI: 0.79-0.95; p=0.003), was associated with 
a lower prevalence of non-intention to vaccinate children against COVID-19. 
Additionally, having one or more comorbidities (aPR=0.83; 95%CI: 0.75-0.91; 
p<0.001) and being vaccinated against COVID-19 (aPR=0.17; 95%CI: 0.15-0.20; 
p<0.001) were associated with a lower prevalence of non-intention to vaccinate 
children against COVID-19 (Table 3). 

In the Peruvian sample, 52.81% were female, 33.01% were between 35 to 44 
years old, 51.48% had at least a full university post-graduate degree 
completed/university completed/college/pre-university, 75.98% lived in a city, and 
11.39% reported having smoked. In addition, 90.39% and 93.94% had complied 
with physical distancing and the use of a mask, respectively. We found that 
76.26% reported having food insecurity, while 89.95% reported having economic 
insecurity. Anxiety and depressive symptoms were reported in 42.31% and 
50.01%, respectively, and 62.81% of the participants did not report comorbidities, 
53.71% were not yet vaccinated against COVID-19, and 45.91% had had COVID-
19 at some point. The prevalence of parents´ non-intention to vaccinate their 
children and adolescents against COVID-19 was 6.64% (Table 1). 

In Peru, the regions with the highest prevalence of non-intention to vaccinate 
children against COVID-19 were Moquegua (13.73%), Madre de Dios (13.65%), 
and Puno (11.83%). On the other hand, the regions with a lower prevalence of 
non-intention to vaccinate children against COVID-19 were Pasco (4.10%), Lima 
(4.82%), and Piura (5.03%) (Figure 2b). 

We found statistically significant differences between the independent variables 
and the intention of parents to vaccinate their children and adolescents against 
COVID-19, except for smoking (p=0.797) (Table 2).  

In the adjusted regression model, we found female gender (aPR=0.81; 0.71-0.93; 
p=0.002) compared to male gender was associated with a lower prevalence of 
non-intention to vaccinate children against COVID-19. Likewise, compliance with 
physical distancing (aPR=0.45; 95%CI: 0.39-0.52; p<0.001), use of masks 
(aPR=0.71; 95%CI: 0.65-0.90; p=0.005), economic insecurity (aPR=0.66; 
95%CI: 0.59-0.75; p<0.001), anxiety symptoms (aPR=0.82; 95%CI: 0.70-0.97; 
p=0.020) were associated with a lower prevalence of non-intention to vaccinate 
children against COVID-19. In addition, having one or more comorbidities 
(aRP=0.74; 95%CI: 0.63-0.86; p<0.001), being vaccinated against COVID-19 
(aPR=0.24; 95%CI: 0.20-0.28; p<0.001) and having had COVID-19 (aPR=0.83; 
95%CI: 0.73-0.94; p=0.006) were associated with a lower prevalence of non-
intention to vaccinate children against COVID-19. On the other hand, living in a 
town (aPR=1.16; 95%CI: 1.00-1.35; p=0.048) and living in a village or rural area 
(aPR=1.51; 95%CI: 1.26-1.80; p<0.001) compared to living in the city was 
associated with a higher prevalence of non-intention to vaccinate children against 
COVID-19 (Table 3). 

Our main results show that about 9 out of 10 parents in Colombia and Peru intend 
to vaccinate their children and adolescents against COVID-19. In Colombia, 
being between 35 and 54 years old, adherent to maintaining physical distance, 
using masks, having economic insecurity, having symptoms of anxiety and 
comorbidities, and being vaccinated were associated with a higher probability of 
vaccinating children against COVID-19. In Peru, being female, an adherent to 
maintaining social distancing, using a mask, having economic and food 
insecurity, having comorbidities, having been vaccinated, and having had 
COVID-19 was associated with a lower probability of not having the intention to 
vaccinate children. On the contrary, living in a town or rural area was associated 
with a greater intention not to vaccinate. 

Our results of the intention to vaccinate children and adolescents are similar to 
those found in the evaluation carried out between May and June 2021 in LAC (13). 
This are good news in terms of public health because the Ministries of Health of 
Peru and Colombia have already scheduled or started vaccination against 
COVID-19 with different vaccines in children and adolescents (28,29). This 
acceptance is expected to be reflected in the increase in population coverage of 
the vaccine to achieve the rate needed to obtain herd immunity. However, 
variations between the regions of the countries and in the case of Peru, according 
to the place of residence, require individualization of the vaccination programs 
based on the region. 

As in other LAC countries, some factors associated with the socioeconomic and 
psychological consequences of the pandemic reduce the non-intention of 
vaccination(13). Indeed, aspects such as stress(13), economic or food insecurity as 
a result of the economic crisis during the pandemic and especially during the first 
wave (30), possibly created a state of alert and the desire for such a situation not 
to be repeated, being vaccination seen as an opportunity to achieve this (13). 
Along the same line, adherence to community mitigation measures such as the 
use of masks and social distancing may reflect a higher likelihood of complying 
with vaccination. Similarly, the feeling of vulnerability (26) and the desire to avoid 
this happening to their children may foster the positive view of vaccination and 
reduce the probability of non-intention to vaccinate their children (13). 

While some factors coincide among the different countries, some studies have 
shown that some factors can be explained by social determinants and 
socioeconomic differences between countries (19–24). Although, to date, no study 
has compared these differences, there may be several explanations. In a 
previous study by our group evaluating food insecurity in LAC in the first stage of 
the pandemic, it was found that food insecurity was higher in Peru than in 
Colombia (83.9% vs. 76.8%, respectively), which may explain the results of the 
present study (30). Similarly, the impact of the pandemic was different in the two 
countries, with the number of deaths registered until November 17, 2021, being 
more than 200 thousand in Peru (31) and about 128 thousand in Colombia (32). 
These differences might suggest that the fear of having had the infection and its 
consequences have led to the desire of this not happening to their children and 
an increase in the intention to vaccinate them. On the other hand, according to 
the document "Distinctive features of health systems in the world, 2017" the 
Colombian health system is better developed than the Peruvian (33). Indeed, in 
Peru, despite the improvements, structural problems and coverage of health 
services in areas such as rural areas had a great impact on health care during 
the pandemic and could explain our present results (34,35). 

There were great variations in the intention to vaccinate among the different 
regions of Peru. The regions with the least intention to vaccinate were Madre de 
Dios, Puno, and Moquegua. In contrast, the regions of Lima and Lambayeque 
had the highest intention to vaccinate children and adolescents against COVID-
19. The Madre de Dios and Moquegua regions presented the lowest fatality 
during the pandemic, which may explain the lesser feeling of fear, commented 
previously compared to Lambayeque, for example, which is one of the 
departments with the highest fatality (31). However, the complexity of the impact 
of the pandemic in each region is far from being fully understood, which could 
explain why, in the department of Puno, a region with low mortality, the intention 
to vaccinate is low. However, it is likely that some aspects such as self-medication 
(36), knowledge about the disease (37), and the reliability of the sites where 
Peruvians obtain information (38) on the pandemic or the variation in prevention 
practices among Peruvians (39), may explain the differences in intention to 
vaccinate children among the different regions of Peru. 

In Colombia, the departments with the highest vaccination intention were Vaupés, 
San Andrés, Bolívar, Guainía, and Cundinamarca, being above 94%. Several of 
these regions were significantly affected by COVID-19, especially in terms of 
concentration of cases per inhabitant. In departments such as San Andrés, there 
was deep state intervention in different aspects due to the initial level of 
involvement of COVID, which might influence the subsequent vaccination 
intention. Likewise, in the department of Bolívar, where the capital, Cartagena, is 
located, there were also a considerable number of cases and deaths, which may 
influence the intention of vaccination (40). The vaccination program in Colombia is 
led by a mass media campaign (41), having the support of scientific societies, such 
as the Colombian Association of Infectious Diseases, which promotes information 
based on evidence to both health personnel and the community, and this could 
also contribute to the intention of vaccination (42). 

Our study has some limitations. Since the respondents were users of a social 
network, information was only obtained from people with access to the internet 
and social networks, which could vary between the regions of the countries 
evaluated and the rural population. We do not have the non-response rate, which 
is relevant in the context of an online survey. The variables included in this 
analysis were pre-established in the survey, and there could be relevant variables 
not included in our analysis. The data were obtained by self-reporting and, 
therefore, an underreporting of information is possible. Finally, due to the design 
of the study, our results should only be interpreted in the context of associations 
since causality among the variables evaluated could not be established. 
However, this study presents the strength of analyzing a database with a large 
representative sample of social network users widely used in Colombia and Peru. 

In conclusion, about 9 out of 10 parents in Colombia and Peru intend to vaccinate 
their children and adolescents against COVID-19. This intention is associated 
with some factors which are similar between the two countries, as well as other 
factors and variations among the different regions of each country. This means 
that despite good general acceptance of vaccination against COVID-19, the 
health authorities of each country must propose individualized strategies 
depending on the context if the vaccination campaigns in this population group 
are to achieve their objectives. This includes not only broadening the target 
groups of both unvaccinated and vaccinated but also achieving high coverage 
with an additional booster or complementary doses. Finally, scientific evidence 
must be communicated to the public, including aspects that may affect confidence 
in vaccines, such as the new variants of concern, including the Omicron variant, 
among other aspects. 
