Intensive care units (ICUs) have adopted flexible visitation models as a way to favor care 
focused on the needs of patients and their families. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate an extended 
visitation model in an adult ICU from the perspective of family members and the health 
care team. METHODS: Cross-sectional study. This study was carried out with relatives 
of patients and with the health care team in a general ICU with an extended visitation 
model, in a hospital in the south of Brazil. The evaluation of the extended visitation policy 
was carried out using a 22-question survey. RESULTS: The answers of 95 accompanying 
family members and 95 members of the ICU care team were analyzed. Members of the 
nursing staff evaluated the changes in attitudes at work as negative (77.9%) , believe that 
the work gests interrupted (46.3%), and consider that it contributes little to decreasing 
anxiety and stress in the family. The accompanying family members evaluated the 
following elements more positively: decreased anxiety and stress in the family (91.6% 
versus 58.9%;p <0.01); family members get more information (86.3% versus 64.2%; p 
<0.01). CONCLUSION: Both groups evaluated as positive the majority of the aspects of 
the extended visitation model. However, the aspects that presented the greatest 
divergence in the evaluations, with a more negative perception from ICU health care team 
members, were the interference in their work, changes in attitudes at work, a lower 
perception of the reduction in anxiety and stress in the family and patients, and discomfort 
caused by the presence of a relative.  

The nursing staff is able to improve the experience of families in the ICU environment, 
but they need support to overcome the barriers imposed by the implementation of a 
flexible visitation policy. 

Around the world, the visit to intensive care unit (ICU) patients traditionally takes 
place at restricted hours, due to the theoretical risk of increased physiological stress, 
damage to the organization of care of the critical patient, and the increased risk of 
infectious complications caused by a policy of flexible visitation (McAdam and  Puntillo, 
2013; Cabrera and Cunha, 2014; Ramos et al., 2014). However, some ICUs are changing 
their restrictive visitation policy to an open or flexible visitation schedule, in order to 
favor care centered on patients' needs, increasing the satisfaction of the patients and their 
relatives (Vandijck et al., 2010; Rosa et al., 2010; Puggina et al., 2014). However, some 
professionals show resistance and believe that the presence of a family member may lead 
to a greater workload of the nursing staff and to a greater disorganization of patient care 
(Ramos et al., 2013; Giannini et al., 2013). Knowledge of the points in which 
professionals and family members agree and disagree regarding flexible visits can help 
optimizing a model that pleases patients, family, and staff, since the main interest is the 
recovery and the care of the patient in an extremely intensive environment (Goldfarb et 
al., 2017; Begonã and Tricas, 2012; Gerritsen et al., 2017; Cappellini et al., 2017).  

The hospitalization of a person in an ICU is characterized as a difficult time for 
the family, who can experience different feelings that involve not only the family member 
who is hospitalized but also his or her life perspectives, causing, in certain cases, 
emotional destabilization. The concept of the ICU as a place of gravity and death, coupled 
with the family's lack of preparation to deal with patients’ hospitalization, leads some 
family members to experience feelings of uncertainty and impotence in the face of the 
inevitable and the unknown (Athanasiou et al., 2014). 

Previous studies have shown that rigid times for the family's stay in the 
hospitalization unit, limited physical space, professionals unavailable to clarify the doubts 
of the relatives, lack of compassion toward the family’s situation, and dissatisfaction with 
emerging needs are some of the barriers encountered in the interaction with the team in a 
highly intensive environment (Vandijck et al., 2010; Huffines et al., 2013). 

The structure and norms of most hospitals have not been planned for caregivers 
and family members, i.e., the visiting hours, the limits of their responsibility for care, 
control of sleep, bathing, temperature, food, are organized according to hospital rules, not 
taking into account the habits and routines of patients and their families (Fumis et al., 
2015). ICU visitation has traditionally been carried out in a format that restricted the 
number of visitors in pre-established times, lasting, in general, from 30 to 60 minutes, 
during the different times of the day: morning, afternoon, and evening. 

The visit of the relatives is positive for the recovery of ICU patients. In cases 
where messages or responses to patient care actions are not understood by the 
professionals, family members can assist in the interpretation and transmission of 
information between the patient and the staff  (McAdam and  Puntillo, 2013; Cabrera and 
Cunha, 2014; Ramos et al., 2014; Vandijck et al., 2010).  .  

If the family member stays in the hospital for longer, it is necessary to implement 
measures that provide satisfactory and comfortable conditions for their stay in the hospital 
environment. Among them, we highlight the preparation of the team to receive and inform 
these relatives, since the work routine often requires professional interaction with patients 
and their families. It is important to understand that the extended visitation approach is a 
complex process that takes into account the interests of patients and family members. 

To evaluate an extended visitation model in an adult intensive care unit from the 
perspective of family members and the health care team. 

A cross-sectional study carried out in a 56-bed adult ICU, in a general hospital 
that has flexible family visiting hours in the South of Brazil, allowing up to two family 
members to remain at the patient's bedside for up to 12 hours during the day. 

Inclusion criteria for accompanying family members were: belonging to the 
family of hospitalized patients, regardless of sex (parents, children, siblings, or spouses), 
older than 18 years of age, having remained for longer than two hours a day at the bedside 
of a patient who had been in the sector of the hospital for more than 48 hours, whichever 
the reason for the hospitalization. Caregivers selected by the family member responsible 
for the patient were also included. Family members and caregivers with visual 
impairments were excluded from the study. Also included were ICU care team members 
(nurse staff,  physiotherapists, nutritionists, psychologists, and staff physicians) according 
to the following criteria: being part of the functional structure of the ICU; having been 
working in the sector for at least 3 months; and being familiar with the concept of flexible 
visits of more than two hours a day. The questionnaires in which any of the questions 
were unanswered were excluded from the study. 

Data collection was carried out from September to December 2016. The 
assessment of the flexible visitation policy with the care team was made through the open 
visit questionnaire (Ramos et al., 2013). All the questions were answered on a Likert 
scale: never (1), occasionally (2), often (3), and always (4), except for questions 20, 21 
and 22 , which had three possible answers: yes (1), no (2), don’t know (3). 

The subjects who were accompanying the hospitalized relative were invited to 
take part in the survey, and, after accepting, signed the Informed Consent Term. The 
questionnaires were given to the subjects, who answered in a private place, near or inside 
the ICU, and then left them in a reserved place in the research room. The same 
questionnaire was used to evaluate the flexible visitation policy for accompanying family 
members, with some questions adapted for better comprehension. Both questionnaires 
were 
self-administered 
and 
took 
approximately 
30 
minutes 
to 
complete. 
Sociodemographic variables were also collected from family members and caregivers. 

The sample calculation for the care team members was based on a previous study, 
which used the evaluation tool for open visitation (Ramos et al., 2013). Considering that 
positive evaluation responses were around 44.8% for the care team, with a 5% error and 
a significance of 5%, based on the contingent of professionals working in the sector, it 
was necessary to include 95 participants. The same number of participants was chosen 
for the group of relatives for comparison purposes. 

Descriptive and analytical data analyses was carried out using the software 
Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS), version 21.0. For the presentation of 
the results, the answers were grouped into negative (never / occasionally) and positive 
(frequently / always). The answers of questions Q3, Q4, Q9, Q10, Q11, Q12, Q13, Q14, 
and Q15 were encoded inversely. Categorical variables were presented in absolute (n) 
and relative (%) numbers. Continuous variables were presented as mean and standard 
deviation. Categorical variables were compared using the chi-square test. The comparison 
of the responses between the groups was carried out using Mann-Whitney’s test. A p 
<0.05 was considered statistically significant. 

The institutional review board reviewed and approved this study (CAAE nº 
54454016.5.0000.5345).  

A total of 95 family members of patients admitted to the ICU and 95 members of 
the ICU care team were included. In relation to the members of the team, the majority of 
the participants were nursing technicians 57 (60%), nurses 19 (20%), physicians 11 
(11.6%), and others 8 (8.4%). The average time the care team members had worked in 
the field was 4.2 years (SD, 4), with a mean age of 32 ± 6 years. The majority of the 
attending family members were women (78=82.1%). The mean age of the accompanying 
family members was 51 ± 12 years. Regarding the neurological status of the patients, 63 
(66.3%) were conscious / able to speak. The most affected organ systems at the time of 
collection were neurological 23 (24.2%), respiratory 22 (23.2%), and cardiovascular 19 
(20%). 

The accompanying relatives had a more positive view of visiting flexibility than 
the ICU care team. Table 1 shows the percentage of responses categorized as positive or 
negative perceptions. All the answers differed significantly, except for the answers to 
questions 12 and 18. Among the questions that showed the greatest difference in the 
positive perceptions were those related to interruptions in the work of the team (Q11), 
changes in team attitudes (Q16), and the reduction of anxiety and stress in the family 
(Q5). 

This study has evaluated the policy of extended visitation in adult ICUs from the 
perspective of family members and ICU care team members, two years after they were 
established at a hospital in southern Brazil. Family members who accompanied patients 
in an adult ICU were predominantly female, professionally active, with a college or 
university degree, and were mainly the children of the patients. Previous studies identified 
women as the most present and participatory family members as caregivers in a hospital 
environment (Goldfarb et al., 2017; Huffines et al., 2013). Even with many women now 
in the labor market, there are still a greater number of women in family care, a fact that 
may be related to the cultural conditions established by society, where women are 
engaged and involved in the care process when faced with the illness of a family member 
(Cappellini et al., 2014). 

In this study we observed that most relatives and care team members have a 
positive perception of a companion, be them family or caregivers, staying at the bedside 
as they perceive benefits to the patient's recovery, thus alleviating the family's suffering. 
However, the results showed that family members have a more positive perception of the 
extended visit when compared to the care team in several aspects, which are highlighted 
below. 

In terms of work interruptions and delays in analyzing and carrying out procedures 
with the extended visiting time, the accompanying relatives believe they are not 
interrupting and causing delays, but the perception of the care team differs significantly. 
Similar data were found in a study that verified nurses’ opinions about open visits, in 
which 75.5% of nurses believe that they make it difficult to plan nursing care, and 59.4% 
believe that they delay procedures with patients. However, they recognize that there are 
emotional benefits for family members and patients (Smithburger et al., 2017). Another 
study evaluated the perceptions of the medical staff, nurses, and physical therapists, and 
the results showed that most of the professionals believe that there are delays in patient 
care and in the unit with the continuous presence of the family member (Gerritsen et al., 
2017). It is believed that the presence of certain family members may cause an increase 
in the workload of the professionals in the ICU and cause delays in the performance of 
tasks and routines. Cases were highlighted in which the family member frequently asks 
for information, making questions and requests to the nursing professionals, interrupts 
the team during procedures, walks between the other beds, interfering with the dynamics 
of the unit, or indirectly contributes to the patient's restlessness. In stressful situations 
such as these, it is up to the care team to evaluate the case and prioritize the patient's 
comfort, even if it is away from the family member. Thus, the approaches to visits should 
be individualized in each unit, since they must meet the needs of patients, families and 
health professionals. 

Most members of the ICU care team evaluate as negative the changes in attitudes 
at work as a result of the extended visits, as opposed to the family, who mostly evaluates 
them as positive. The care provided by the professionals should convey security and 
confidence, enabling the patient and the family to understand and accept the established 
procedures and make the treatment more effective (Clark et al., 2016; Fumis et al., 2015). 
The presence of the companion in the ICU alters the daily life of the unit and causes 
structural and organizational changes, bringing about new spaces of social interaction. 
This fact shows the need for more effective communication strategies between those 
directly involved, since the accompanying family member has greater contact with the 
team and more time to observe the care of the patient. 

In terms of the reduction of anxiety and stress in patients and relatives, it was 
observed that most participants perceive the decrease in these symptoms, but more than 
a third of the care team believes that these symptoms can never or only occasionally be 
reduced in relatives and patients admitted to the ICU. It is known that the permanence of 
family members in very intensive environments for a longer period of time helps to reduce 
feelings of anxiety, stress, delirium and depression in patients (Rosa et al., 2010; Clark et 
al, 2016). On the other hand, some professionals and services believe that the presence 
of family members increases the physiological stress of the patients, since the presence 
of a family member may represent a barrier to care and assistance, and due to the fact that  
hospitalization will result in physical and mental exhaustion within the family (Cabrera 
and Cunha, 2014; Giannini et al., 2013). 

Regarding the discomforts caused by the presence of the family beside the patient, 
it was observed that this fact is more uncomfortable for the ICU care team, though the 
family barely perceive this. Similar data were found in a study which showed that the 
professionals felt uncomfortable when examining the patient in the presence of the family 
(Gerritsen et al., 2017). Some of these discomforts reported by the team may be caused 
by the lack of familiarity with having a visitor observing the everyday work practices of 
the sector and having the work dynamics changed due to possible questions from the 
relatives about the care of the patient. With the professionals carrying out their activities 
in the more open ICU visitation scenario, it will become natural and even profitable in 
the sense of permitting the participation and interaction with the accompanying patient 
and family member. 

In our study, both groups agree that a positive aspect of the extended visit is that 
the family can obtain more information about the patient. A previous study showed that 
the nursing team of an evaluated ICU did not know how it can transmit security, both 
with regard to the type of information that may be given and in the interpretation of the 
care provided (Ellis et al., 2015). It must be emphasized that the preparation of the care 
team to receive and inform these family members is paramount, since the daily work of 
the team requires the interaction of the professional with the patients and family members. 
Providing clear and continuous information can contribute to some decisions that the 
family needs to make in relation to the best patient behavior, since the constant and active 
presence of the family can help in the decisions shared between the team and the family 
regarding the best practices in terms of care and treatment. It should be noted that 
meetings between the multiprofessional team and the family members in the first 24-48 
hours after admission are one of the possibilities of improving communication 
techniques, establishing combinations and clarifying doubts, setting goals to alleviate the 
stress and anxiety of family members, as well as establishing agreements of the rights and 
duties of the companions during the hospitalization period. 

Extended visits allows the professionals to know the reality of each family as well 
as the support network of each patient, and to transmit information that brings comfort 
and eases the suffering experienced by the patients and their families, thus providing a 
more humanized assistance. 

This study has limitations. Firstly, the research was conducted in a single center. 
Secondly, because it was self-administered, some questions may have untrustworthy 
answers due to a lack of understanding of the issues. 

It is up to the nurses and other members of the care team responsible for care 
management in intensive care settings to analyze the possibilities of making patient visits 
more flexible. The nursing team is able to improve the experience of families in the ICU 
environment because they are in direct daily contact with the patients and can offer 
support in moments of emotional difficulty when the family members meet (Eugênio and 
Souza, 2017). In addition, they may involve the family in small tasks, such as helping the 
patient to eat, as well as during hygiene and comfort procedures, showing important 
images, explaining and orienting events with calm and tranquility and thus empowering 
the family and promoting the autonomy of part of the care. 

In order to do so, teams need support to overcome the barriers imposed on the 
implementation of a flexible visitation policy. Knowledge of the different perceptions of 
professionals and family members is a way to optimize actions directed to an extended 
visitation model, since it is possible to elaborate strategies to educate family members 
and train professionals to deal with the increased presence of relatives in the ICU and 
reassess the number of professionals required per patient. 

Both groups evaluated as positive the majority of the aspects related to the model 
of extended visitation. However, the aspects which were the most different in their 
assessments and had a more negative perception from the health team members were the 
interference in the work of the team and changes in attitudes at work. The health team 
also had a lower perception of the reduction of anxiety and stress in the family and 
patients, and of the discomfort caused by the presence of a relative. 

What is known about the subject: 

● Poor communication is a source of stress for those involved in intensive patient 
care, especially between staff and family; 

● Most professionals believe that there are delays in the ICU patient care activities 
resulting from the continuous presence of the family member; 

● The presence of the companion in the adult ICU changes the daily life of the unit 
and causes structural and organizational changes. 

What this paper contributions are: 

● It presents elements that can be considered for the planning and implementation of 
flexible visitation programs or policies in an ICU environment, which can also be 
used by care teams in discussions about the presence of the family member at the 
bedside, as a new space of social interactions; 

● It recommends an initial systematized approach to family and support strategies 
for the team to overcome barriers resulting from the implementation of a flexible 
or open visitation policy. 
