The novel coronavirus pandemic recently declared by 
the World Health Organization1 has led several municipal 
and state health departments to issue decrees closing 
different spaces intended for practicing physical activity. 
Furthermore, the Ministry of Health2 has prepared a 
manual with several initiatives to prevent the spread of 
the disease, in addition to making decisions suggesting 
social isolation and recommending that people remain at 
home. All of these measures have made it more difficult 
for the Brazilian population to practice physical activity.

On the other hand, the literature has consistently 
provided evidence regarding the diverse health benefits 
that physical activity promotes,3 especially to the 
cardiovascular/metabolic4 and immunological system.5 
More recently, the literature began to show evidence that 
health is related not only to regular practice of physical 
activity, but also to reduced sedentary behavior, in other 
words, time spent sitting, lying down, or reclining during 
the day, excluding sleep hours.6

Accordingly, there is an important need to continue 
practicing physical activity during the novel coronavirus 
pandemic; however, some measures should be observed 
in order to keep this practice safe. It is worth emphasizing 
that even in the city of Wuhan, China, the initial epicenter 
of the disease, it was recommended that people continue 
practicing physical activity inside their homes.7 Furthermore, 
it has become important that the population be informed 
regarding the need to reduce sedentary behavior during 
this period of social isolation.

Thus, the objectives of this viewpoint are to emphasize 
the importance of these issues and to propose suggestions 
for continuing practice of physical activity and reducing 
sedentary behavior during the novel coronavirus 
pandemic in Brazil.

The benefits of regular physical activity to cardiovascular/
metabolic health have been widely published in the 
literature for a long time. Physical activity has been shown to 
be inversely associated with blood pressure levels, diabetes, 
lipid alterations, and other cardiovascular events.4,8

With respect to duration and intensity of physical activity 
required for these benefits to occur, a recent publication 
suggested that 180 to 300 minutes of moderate to intense 
activity weekly for men and 150 to 300 minutes of moderate to 
intense activity for women would be the most adequate measure 
for promoting cardiovascular and metabolic health benefits.9 
These recommendations are in agreement with the main physical 
activity guidelines published by international organizations.

The immune system is an important defense mechanism of 
the body. It is capable of recognizing and eliminating a series of 
invasive microorganisms. The first line of defense is made up 
of leukocytes (neutrophils, eosinophils, basophils, monocytes), 
which are natural killer cells, acute-phase proteins, and 
enzymes. The second line of defense is made up of T and B 
lymphocytes and imunoglobulins.5 

Practice of physical exercise modulates the quantity 
of these substances in the organism, both increasing and 
decreasing, and the magnitude depends on the intensity 
and duration of physical activity. 

In relation to leukocytes, for example, during practice 
of physical activity, their concentration increases, and it is 
immediately reduced following physical practice, especially 
after exercise with long duration and high intensity that may 
lead to immunosuppression, according to the theory of the 
“open window,” when there is a depression in the immune 
system after strenuous exercise, leaving the organism more 
susceptible to bacteria for a period of 3 to 72 hours. It is worth 
stressing that the period of immunosuppression is much shorter 
after light to moderate exercise without prolonged duration.5

Sedentary behavior is defined as activities characterized 
by low energy expenditure, not exceeding 1.5 metabolic 
equivalents, including the specific behaviors of sitting, 
reclining, or lying down to read, study, watch television, use 
the computer, etc., excluding sleep hours.6

A recent publication has demonstrated that reduced 
sedentary behavior is associated with beneficial effects on 
diverse variables that represent cardiometabolic health in 
adults.10 In this same study, the authors also demonstrated 
that, when the reduction in sedentary behavior was 
associated with regular practice of physical activity, 
the benefits were maximized. 

Considering that Brazil is a country of continental 
dimensions, it is important to accompany decisions 
published by state or municipal health departments and by 
the Ministry of Health regarding restricted access to gyms, 
clubs, clinics, and other spaces intended for practicing 
physical activity and exercise.

In the event that these spaces are closed to the public, 
physical activity should, whenever possible, continue in 
open-air environments. In this case, people should prioritize 
individual activities, always taking care to avoid crowds or 
even small groups of people. If these conditions are restricted, 
physical activity should be continued at home, preferably 
with the assistance of technology, such as exercise videos, 
applications, or professional guidance online. 

When it is possible to practice physical activity 
outdoors, aerobic activities are recommended, especially 
individual activities; crowds should be avoided. At this 
moment, it is necessary to avoid practicing group sports, 
even in small groups.

In the event that it is necessary to exercise at home, 
muscle-strengthening exercises (squats, push-ups, sit‑ups, 
and others), stretches, balancing exercises, and climbing 
up and down stairs are recommended, preferably 
with the assistance of technology, such as exercise 
videos, applications, and professional guidance online. 
It  is, furthermore, worth emphasizing the importance 
of increased domestic physical activity, i.e., general 
housework, such as washing dishes, washing and ironing 
clothes, and similar activities.

During the coronavirus pandemic in Brazil, it is recommended 
that the intensity of physical exercise be light to moderate, 
given that very high intensity may lead to more accentuated 
immunosuppression, requiring longer recovery time.

During the coronavirus pandemic in Brazil, it is 
recommended that the duration of each exercise session be 
approximately 30 to 60 minutes daily. It is suggested that total 
time not be too long due to the immune system depression 
with longer recovery time. 

Considering that, in addition to regular practice of physical 
activity, it is very important to reduce sedentary behavior, the 
following are recommended:

1. Reduce sedentary behavior to a maximum of 6 to 
8 cumulative hours daily.

2. Reduce to a maximum of 2 to 4 hours sitting in front of 
the screen daily. 

3. Attempt to maximize the number of interruptions/pauses 
to sitting time, namely, for every hour spent sitting, stand 
up for at least 5 minutes.

Based on the studies consulted, the evidence confirms the 
importance of continuing to practice physical activities during 
the novel coronavirus pandemic, with light to moderate intensity 
and duration, preferably in outdoor environments or at home. 
In addition, it is also very important to emphasize reducing 
sedentary behavior, namely, time spent sitting, lying down, or 
reclining, excluding sleep hours, and time spent in front of the 
television, computer, and similar devices. 
