Introduction: The mandibular canal (MC), located within the mandible, carries the inferior 
alveolar nerve and the inferior alveolar vessels. This neurovascular bundle is at risk during 
mandibular surgical procedures. Therefore, an adequate preoperatively evaluation of the MC 
could lead to safer treatment with less postoperative complications. 

Aim: The aim of this paper 
was to review the most common radiographic techniques of the MC for better preoperative 
planning in dentistry. 

Methods: Three radiographic techniques (periapical, panoramic and cone-
beam computed tomography) along with their advantages and disadvantages are hereby reviewed 
with special emphasis on their clinical applicability in the dentist’s everyday practice. 

Discussion: Panoramic radiography and cone-beam computed tomography technology are 
considered very useful in the assessment of the MC. 

Conclusion: All techniques reviewed in this 
paper except the periapical radiography can be useful in the visibility of the MC. 

The mandibular canal (MC), located within the mandible, carries the inferior alveolar nerve 
(IAN), which is a branch of the mandibular nerve, the third division of the trigeminal nerve, and 
the inferior alveolar vessels (artery and vein) [1,2]. The IAN supplies sensation to the mandibular 
teeth and gingivae and branches into: a) the mental nerve which exits the MC through the mental 
foramen supplying sensory innervations to the chin and lower lip and b) the mylohyoid nerve 
providing motor innervations to the mylohyoid muscle [2,3]. 

According to its location and path, the IAN is at risk during mandibular surgical procedures 
[4,5]. Any aggression to the nervous bundle or ramifications may lead to a temporary/permanent 
loss of tactile sensation of the lower lip and chin [4]. In a study with shocking results performed 
in 2005, Robert et al. stated that 94.5% of surveyed California oral and maxillofacial surgeons 
reported instances of injury to the IAN during mandibular surgeries in a 12-month period [4]. 
Dimensions and paths of the MC are important parameters which decisively contribute to correct 
planning. Thus, an adequate preoperative visibility of the MC can yield safer treatments with less 
IAN morbidity [6,7]. 

In a study investigating the vertical positioning of the IAN in 39 edentulous human cadaveric 
mandibles, Kieser et al. found 30.7% (12 out of 39) of IAN located in the superior part of the 
body of the mandible, and 69.2% (27 out of 39) half‐way or closer to the inferior border of the 
mandible [8]. 

On the other hand, Kane et al. who assessed the bucco-lingual position of the MC in 20 patients 
using computed tomography (CT) found that the IAN and accompanying vessels are situated 
more or less at 4.7mm from the buccal aspect and at 1.8mm from the lingual side of the mandible 
at the level of the mandibular first molar [9]. 

The bucco-lingual position of the MC and the topography of the IAN were investigated using 
three-dimensional reconstruction by Kim et al. on sixty-two mandible sides. The researchers 
conclude that 70% of the canals followed the lingual aspect at the ramus and the mandibular 
body, 15% were located at the middle of the ramus behind the second molar and lingually when 
passing through the second and first molars, and the last 15% followed the middle or the lingual 
third of the mandible from the ramus to the body. On the other side, also according to Kim et al., 
the inferior alveolar vessels were above the IAN in 80% and in 20% lateral to it [10]. 

Usually the MC is unique but sometimes it may be bifid [6,11,12] and rarely trifid [13]. 
According to Nasseh and Aoun, bifid MC can be found in every patient even if considered 
uncommon and hence must be assessed effectively [6]. 

In fact, bifurcation of the MC was investigated by many authors via different radiographic 
techniques. Panoramic radiographs were used by Nortje et al. [11] and Langlais et al. [12] who 
found, respectively, a prevalence of  bifid MC of 0.91% (33 out of 3612) and 0.95% (57 out of 
6000). 

Other authors used other imaging technology such as CT and cone-beam computed tomography 
(CBCT) [14,15].  

Usually the MC exits the mandible buccally at the mental foramen located at the apical region of 
the premolars [16-23].  

The aim of this article was to review different visibility methods of the MC, their advantages and 
disadvantages, as well as their clinical application in the dentist’s everyday practice. 

In daily dental practice, the radiographic evaluation of the MC is mostly performed on periapical, 
panoramic and CBCT images with a percentage of visibility of 28%, 32% and 98% respectively 
[24]. On conventional two-dimensional (2D) radiography, the MC appears as a radiolucent 
image, with two well-defined radiopaque borders, inferior to the mandibular molars and 
premolars roots [25]. This typical appearance is mainly due to the principle of the radiographic 
lines formation. A radiopaque radiographic line is visible whenever the primary X-ray beam is 
perpendicular to the surface of separation of two different densities. In the case of the MC, the 
two different densities are due to the trabecular bone and the inferior neurovascular bundle. 

Due to their small size and short coverage, periapical radiographs, although having the best 2D 
image resolution, are not advised for MC evaluation [25]. 

Unlike periapical radiographs, the panoramic 2D X-ray captures the entire mouth where, among 
many other structures, the MC is clearly visible (Figure 1). Liu et al. had classified its path into 
four categories of curves: a) linear, b) arc-elliptic, c) spoon-shaped, and d) turning [26].  

However, the MC visibility decreases when its borders become undetectable due to poor bone 
density or a non-perpendicularity between the canal and the principal beam [27]. Less resolution, 
elevated distortion and the risk of phantom images are also main disadvantage of this technique 
[28]. 

CBCT has been referred to as the “gold standard” for maxillofacial imaging. This three-
dimensional technology exposes the MC image more accurately. De Oliveira-Santos et al. 
concluded that among 41 % of the MCs not detectable on 2D radiographs, a large majority was 
visible on CBCT [29].   

On CBCT, the MC can be seen and traced manually. The operator must be careful in mapping 
the reconstruction and following the MC path (Figure 2). 

Kim et al. developed a new automatic technique to isolate the MC with no intervention from the 
user. In early experimental results by means of 10 clinical DICOM files, this technique could 
exactly recognize the MC. This technique possesses, additionally, the utmost segmentation 
precision [30]. 

For Başa and Dilek, the average density and thickness of the bone surrounding the MC is not 
sufficient to resist the action of drilling, especially during implant placement; consequently, the 
operator must carefully approach the canal [31].  

The location and the anatomical variations of the MC (bifid canal, double and accessory mental 
foramina, the incidence of an anterior loop, etc.) as noticed on CBCT have been largely assessed 
in the literature [5-8, 11-15].  

Panoramic radiography is commonly used in daily dental practice because it offers a full 
teeth/oral structures overview. Concerning the MC, in the majority of cases, it can be detectable 
without difficulty allowing the practitioner to evaluate the risk of IAN injury during invasive 
interventions. However, this 2D technology lacks 3D information and may not visualize the 
small details of the MC [24]. 

Although CBCT is of great importance in the daily oral and maxillofacial practice, it can only 
show the MC and not the nerve itself; yet CBCT is the best technique for pre-surgery 
radiographic planning such as implants placement and surgical extraction of the third molar, etc. 
Being able to delimit the MC can assist the surgeon and prevent potential surgical problems. 

The neurovascular bundle located in the MC is at risk during invasive surgical interventions in 
the mandibular regions. Thus, a thorough assessment before any procedure is essential.  

Among the three techniques reviewed in this paper, panoramic radiography and cone-beam 
computed tomography can be useful in the MC evaluation. 
