The expansion of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) 
throughout the world has alarmed all health professionals. Especially 
in dentistry, there is a growing concern due to it’s high virulence 
and routes of transmission through saliva aerosols. The virus keeps 
viable on air for at least 3 hours and on plastic and stainless-steel 
surfaces up to 72 hours. In this sense, dental offices, both in the public 
and private sectors, are high-risk settings of cross infection among 
patients, dentists and health professionals in the clinical environment 
(including hospital’s intensive dental care facilities). This manuscript 
aims to compile current available evidence on prevention strategies for 
dental professionals. Besides, we briefly describe promising treatment 
strategies recognized until this moment. The purpose is to clarify 
dental practitioners about the virus history and microbiology, besides 
guiding on how to proceed during emergency consultations based on 
international documents. Dentists should consider that a substantial 
number of individuals (including children) who do not show any signs 
and symptoms of COVID-19 may be infected and can disseminate the 
virus. Currently, there is no effective treatment and fast diagnosis is still 
a challenge. All elective dental treatments and non-essential procedures 
should be postponed, keeping only urgent and emergency visits to the 
dental office. The use of teledentistry (phone calls, text messages) is a 
very promising tool to keep contact with the patient without being at 
risk of infection. 

Coronavirus is a family of viruses that causes respiratory infections 
including the new coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) discovered in December 2019 
in China. Coronaviruses represent enveloped, positive stranded RNA virus 
that contains four genera: Alpha-, Beta-, Gamma-, and Deltacoronavirus.1 Six 
different coronavirus have been identified in humans: HCoV-OC43, -229E, 
HCoV-NL63, HKU1, the Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS)-CoV 
and (SARS)-CoV.2 Although the latter virus became widely discussed 
recently, the first human coronaviruses were isolated for the first time in 
1937.3 The denomination coronavirus was due to its microscopic aspect 
resembling crown-like spikes on its surface and 
the main host receptor for humans seems to be the 
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2).4 

This recent COVID-19 turned into a global 
public health outbreak.5,6 It is transmitted after 
contact with infected surfaces and with infected 
patient’s fluids, including saliva and aerosol.6,7 These 
characteristics place the dental offices as main risk 
settings of cross infection among patients, dentists 
and health professionals in the clinical environment, 
including hospital’s dental intensive care facilities.8 
Dental practitioners are exposed to close contact to 
patients, to saliva aerosol, blood and handle sharp 
contaminated instruments.9 

After the World Health Organization (WHO) 
pandemic declaration, institutions like the General 
Coordination of Oral Health from the Brazilian Health 
Ministry published a Technical Note with the main 
clarifications regarding dental practice considering 
the Coronavirus pandemic.10 Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC) and American Dental 
Association (ADA) are recommending dentists to 
postpone elective procedures and concentrating on 
emergency or urgent dental care in order to reduce 
COVID-19 infection,11,12 similar to what several cities 
in China have done.13

As health professionals, it is extremely relevant 
that dentists be aware of the biological and social 
characteristics involved in COVID-19 pandemic, 
contributing to the clarification of the population and 
adopting finest clinical measures to avoid unnecessary 
risks to contain the perioperative transmission.8 Based 
on the current available evidence related to oral health 
care, the aim of the present critical appraisal is to 
compile prevention strategies for dental professionals 
and clarify dental practitioners about the virus history, 
pathogenesis, current pharmacological clinical trials, 
and measures to minimize economic and health 
consequences to the oral health system.

This new health problem emerged from a public 
market in which animals are kept and traded alive in 
Wuham – China. It became the focus of global attention 
after the spread of an unknown cause epidemic 
pneumonia. At first, these cases of pneumonia 
were monitored and tested in the laboratory for 
coronavirus and possible influenza infections. On 
January 7, 2020, Chinese authorities announced that 
a new type of Coronavirus was isolated: the new 
Coronavirus, nCoV.14

This new viral agent, which until that moment 
has not been identified in humans before, was called 
SARS-CoV-2 and is able to cause respiratory infectious 
disease that is called COVID-19. Previous occurrence 
of coronavirus such as the Severe Acute Respiratory 
Syndrome (SARS) (SARS-CoV) and Middle East 
Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) (MERS-CoV) left 774 
and 850 dead, respectively, reflecting the severity 
of the threat and the urgency to control this new 
outbreak as soon as possible.15

The genomic sequence of the new viral 
Coronavirus was immediately defined by public 
health support and online community resources 
“virological.org” on January 10th (Wuhan-Hu-1, 
GenBank accession number MN908947)16 followed 
by four other deposited genomes on January 12th in 
the database of viral genomic sequences maintained 
by the Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza 
Data (GISAID).17 The clinical signs and symptoms 
in the beginning suggested the presence of a virus 
closely related to SARS outbreak in 2002/2003. This 
species also comprised a large number of viruses 
detected in rhinolophid bats in Asia and Europe. 
17 After sequencing, the SARS-CoV-2 genome was 
found to be 96.2% identical to the Bat RaTG13 coV, 
while sharing 79.5% identity with the SARS-CoV. In 
this way, the similarity between the genomes of the 
viruses shows that the bat is the natural host of the 
virus and SARSCoV-2 may have been transmitted to 
humans, in an unknown way, through intermediate 
hosts. Several studies suggest that the bat is the 
potential reservoir of SARS-CoV-2. However, there 
is evidence that the origin of SARS-CoV-2 was the 
seafood market in Wuhan, China.18 Coronaviruses 
(CoV) α- and β-CoV are capable of infecting mammals, 
while γ- and δ-CoV tend to infect birds. Although 
the six CoVs identified as human-susceptible viruses, 
presented low pathogenicity, causing mild respiratory 
symptoms similar to a common cold; SARS-CoV and 
MERS-CoV may lead to severe and potentially fatal 
respiratory tract infections.18,19

Viruses are complex pathogens with a high capacity 
to infect multiple host species, causing a variety 
of diseases with numerous symptoms. CoVs are 
pleomorphic RNA-viruses (subgenus sarbecovirus, 
subfamily Orthocoronavirinae) characterized by high 
speed of gene recombination due to constant errors 
in their RNA polymerase-dependent replication 
process (RdRP).18,20 The main steps involved in the 
replication cycle of SARS-CoV-2 are: recognition 
and binding to the host cell via membrane fusion 
or endocytosis mechanism. After the invasion, the 
viral genome is released; then occurs translation of 
the viral polymerase protein; RNA replication; sub-
genomic transcription; translation of viral structural 
proteins; viral structural proteins combination with 
the nucleocapsid; formation of mature virions and 
finally the release of mature virions by exocytosis. At 
the end of the cycle, newly mature virions are released 
and may infect new targets and the cycle repeats 
itself continuously.15 During their replication cycle, 
two-thirds of the viral RNA encode 16 non-structural 
proteins (NSPs). The other one-third of the virus 
genome encodes four essential structural proteins, 
including: spike glycoprotein (S), small envelope 
protein (E), matrix protein (M) and nucleocapsid 
protein (N), and also other accessory proteins.18,21

Host factors can also influence susceptibility to 
infection and disease progression. Research shows 
that SARS-CoV-2 use angiotensin-converting enzyme 
2 (ACE2). The S-glycoprotein located on the surface of 
the coronavirus can bind to the ACE2 receptor on the 
surface of human cells. After binding to the host cell 
membrane, the RNA of the viral genome is released 
into the cytoplasm and translates two polyproteins, 
pp1a and pp1ab that encode non-structural proteins 
and form the replication and transcription complex 
(RTC) and the replication cycle continues as stated 
above 18. Host antiviral defense plays an important 
role in the course of SARS-CoV-2 infection. As the 
first line of defense against viruses, type I interferon 
(IFN) plays a critical role in initiating host antiviral 
responses. Following virus infection, the host innate 
immune system is activated by the recognition of 
viral-specific components such as ssRNA, dsRNA or 
glycoproteins.22 The Toll-like and RIG-I-like receptors 
are the most common host pattern recognition 
receptors (PRRs) that respond to RNA viruses.23 The 
domains then initiate an antiviral signaling cascade 
by leading the phosphorylation and activation of 
IRF3 and NF-κB, leading to the production of type I 
IFN. IFN-β secretion induces IFN-stimulated genes, 
which will induce the expression of host antiviral 
effector factors.24 

Viruses have developed the capacity to escape 
host immune detection and to suppress the host 
IFN system.25 Viruses encode viral proteins 
that interfere with PRRs signaling pathways to 
increase an early benefit against host defense. For 
example, the SARS-CoV N proteins inhibit RIG-I 
ubiquitination and thus suppress the release of type 
I IFN,26 SARS-CoV M proteins prevents the TRAF3/
TBK1 complex formation and inhibits TBK1/IKKε-
dependent activation of IRF3/IRF7 transcription 
factors.27 Lastly, the repressive modifications that 
are induced by the nonstructural SARS-CoV nsp1 
protein blocks host mRNA translation28 and mediates 
host mRNA degradation.29

Human-to-human transmission of SARS-CoV-2 
occurs primarily between family members, including 
relatives and friends who have more intimate contact 
with infected or asymptomatic patients or carriers. 
As an emerging acute respiratory infectious disease, 
COVID-19 spreads mainly through the respiratory tract 
pathways through droplets, respiratory secretions and 
direct contact even at a low infectious dose. Likewise, 
the presence of SARS-CoV-2 in swabs from fecal and 
blood samples has been identified, indicating the 
possibility of multiple routes of infection.18

Based on the current epidemiological investigation, 
the incubation period is from 1 to 14 days, mainly from 
3 to 7 days, being contagious in its latency period. It 
is highly transmissible in humans, especially in the 
elderly and people with underlying diseases. Patients 
with COVID-19 have symptoms such as fever, malaise 
and cough. Most adults or children infected with 
SARS-CoV-2 have mild flu-like symptoms. However, 
a few patients also progress to a critical condition and 
rapidly develop acute respiratory distress syndrome, 
respiratory failure, multiple organ failure and even 
die.18,30 There are still many gaps in knowledge about 
the epidemiology and clinical overview of COVID-19, 
including the exact incubation period, the possibility 
of transmission from asymptomatic carriers and the 
rate of transmissibility. However, human-human 
transmission has been rapidly proven and remains 
responsible for the continued spread of the disease. 

Reliable laboratory diagnosis is among the 
priorities to facilitate public health interventions. In 
acute respiratory infections, RT-PCR is routinely used 
to detect viruses caused by respiratory secretions. 
During international health emergencies, the viability 
of real-time detection of the virus by real-time 
RT-PCR has been demonstrated through coordination 
between public laboratories and universities. 17

Drugs tested effective for SARS-CoV and/or MERS 
have been included in the WHO mega clinical trial – 
SOLIDARITY.31 For its study, WHO chose a nucleotide 
analogue Remdesivir; the malaria medication 
chloroquine (and its analog hydroxychloroquine); 
a combination of the anti-HIV drugs lopinavir and 
ritonavir; and that combination plus interferon-b. 

Remdesivir is an antiviral prodrug of 
remdesivirtriphosphate with in vitro activity against 
coronaviruses.32,33 Remdesivir-TP acts as an inhibitor of 
RNA-dependent RNA polymerases and competes with 
adenosine-TP for incorporation into emerging viral 
RNA chains.34 Hydroxyhloroquine and chloroquine 
have in vitro activity against SARS-CoV-2 32,35–37 
and the mechanism of action includes inhibition 
of viral enzymes (RNA polymerase), viral protein 
glycosylation, virus assembly, new virus particle 
transport, and virus release. Other mechanisms 
may also involve ACE2 receptor inhibition, decrease 
acidity in endosomes, and immunomodulation of 
cytokine release.5,32,36 

The third arm of SOLIDARITY combines two 
HIV protease inhibitor drugs, lopinavir-ritonavir. 
The combination shown in vitro and in vivo potential 
activity for SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV 38,39 and the 
mechanism of action involves the inhibition of Mpro, 
an essential enzyme for coronavirus replication 40. 
Recent report published in The New England Journal of 
Medicine41 was not encouraging and the combination 
of lopinavir-ritonavir did not differ significantly from 
“standard care” group. 

The fourth arm of SOLIDARITY combines 
lopinavir-ritonavir with interferon-b. The activation 
of innate antiviral response by interferon should 
have beneficial effects at least in the initial stage of 
infection. However, cautions should still be observed 
and the possibility that interferon might exacerbate 
inflammation during the late phase of SARS-CoV-2 
infection cannot be excluded.42

Lastly, clinical trials are being conducted to 
evaluate the use of SARS-CoV-2 convalescent plasma 
from persons who have recovered from COVID-19 
that potentially contain antibodies to treat patients 
with life-threatening viral infections.43 A group led 
by Lei Liu44 gave convalescent plasma (total dose: 
400 mL with a SARS-CoV-2-specific antibody-IgG 
titer greater than 1:1,000) to five critically ill patients 
and the symptoms diminished in all of them within 
ten days. Even though these cases reported by Shen 
et al 44 are compelling, this investigation has some 
limitations. The intervention was not evaluated 
in a randomized clinical trial, and the outcomes 
in the treatment group were not compared with 
outcomes in a control group - patients who did not 
receive the intervention. Moreover, patients received 
numerous other therapies (antiviral and steroids), 
and the convalescent plasma was administered up 
to 21 days, and it is not clear whether this timing is 
optimal or if earlier administration potentially have 
been associated with different outcomes. Despite 
these limitations, the study does provide important 
evidence to support the possibility of evaluating this 
therapy in more rigorous studies.

Dentists are among the professionals with the 
greatest exposure to COVID-19. The oral cavity and the 
work environment represent a high potential source 
for transmissibility and susceptibility to this and other 
etiological agents.7,45,46 The context of undocumented 
infections is significant, which facilitates the rapid 
spread of SARS-CoV-2. A substantial number of 
individuals do not show any signs and symptoms 
or have mild symptoms. These individuals serve 
as the primary source for the majority of reported 
cases and, therefore, for health teams that can 
become multipliers.47,48

The rapid identification of COVID-19 cases is crucial 
for the containment of the pandemic. However, it is 
still challenging due to the lack of pathognomonic 
symptoms, coupled with the limited capacity to 
perform specialized polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR) tests49 - which also have limitations. The need 
to develop fast accurate molecular diagnostics is 
mandatory to identify a large number of infected 
patients and asymptomatic carriers, in order to 
prevent the transmission of the virus and ensure 
proper conduct.50,51 Rapid tests can facilitate elective 
care in the future since the risk of contamination by 
SARS-CoV-2 would be ruled out. However, the dentist 
can never neglect the existence of other diseases 
transmitted by saliva and aerosol, such as hepatitis 
B, measles and tuberculosis.52,53,54

Dentists should receive and make great efforts 
regarding preventive care and testing, as they can 
seriously affect the flattening of the epidemic curve, 
avoiding the collapse of the health system. Several 
modeling studies and scenario comparisons - both 
related to the current pandemic situation and those 
already experienced especially in China and Italy 
- have shown that combined interventions must 
be implemented, both for the population and for 
health professionals. General measures for all health 
professionals including dentists comprise daily 
monitoring of the temperature and testing the health 
care provider team; use of N95 masks; distance from 
the workplace (when possible) with the implementation 
of network communication technologies with patients; 
social distance; mobility restriction measures; avoid 
crowd places; diagnostic tests and isolation of infected 
individuals as well as their families.55–60 Especially for 
dentists it is necessary to follow guidance protocols 
and new tools/technologies for dental practice aimed 
at safeguarding oral health professionals, as well as 
the population under their care.59,61

Due to the nature of the dental treatment, several 
procedures, as the use of high-speed handpiece 
or ultrasonic scalers generates aerosol (very small 
particles or droplets) that can be inhaled, absorbed 
by the skin or set in nearby surfaces.62 According 
to the last Scientific Brief published by the World 
Health Organization,63 the transmission of the 
SARS-CoV-2 can occur by respiratory droplets from 
direct contact with an infected person (distance 
less than 1m), indirect contact with contaminated 
surfaces or objects and by aerosol produced during 
procedures performed on infected patients. Based 
on that, dental and health organizations have issued 
recommendations to postpone all elective dental 
treatments and non-essential procedures and limit 
services only to urgent and emergency visits.10,11,12 
Dental health care personnel (DHCP) should be aware 
of the mechanisms of transmission, the expanded 
infection control procedures, be able to identify 
patients with signs / symptoms of COVID-19 and 
have a clear understanding of what characterizes 
a dental emergency, urgent dental care and non-
emergency dental treatment. 

During the COVID-19 pandemic, DCHP should use 
telecommunication or teledentistry prior the dental 
treatment to evaluate the needs of the patient and 
to minimize the risk of infection, asking if patient 
has fever, cough or shortness of breath (ADA)64 and 
have traveled national or internationally (CDC).65,66 
When possible, dentist should offer advice, prescribe 
medication for analgesia and/or antimicrobial (when 
appropriate) and postpone the visit of the patient to 
the office, but keep direct contact with the patient 
by phone or text message.67 If patient presents a 
dental emergency (potentially life threatening), as 
an uncontrolled bleeding, or an urgent dental need 
that requires relieve of severe pain and/or risk of 
infection,68 and present sign/symptom of respiratory 
infection, this patient should not be seen in a dental 
office and should be referred for an emergency care 
facility where Transmission-Based Precautions (N95 
masks, Airborne Infection Isolation Room for example) 
are available (ADA).64 

In the United Kingdom, the National Health 
Service (NHS) is working with dental practices 
and community dental services to establish Local 
Dental Urgent Care System in every region. These 
dental offices will accommodate visits of all types of 
patients, including those with suspected or confirmed 
COVID-19, patients that are shielded, vulnerable or 
patients without any of those specific conditions. In 
those places dental public health practitioners will be 
available and will have access to the FFP3 respirator 
to perform the treatment.67

In most countries, cases of dental emergency or 
urgent dental care on patients without any signs and 
symptoms of COVID-19 can be treated at the dental 
office. However, since there is a large number of 
asymptomatic cases of Covid-19,47 the dentist should 
take extra precautions when seeing the patient 
and not assume he/she is COVID-19 free. Besides 
the asymptomatic patients, dental practitioners 
should be aware that children represent a significant 
transmission risk to the virus since they present 
milder symptoms than adults.69 It is important to 
maintain patient isolation (have only one patient in 
the waiting room), adhere to the infection control 
protocol: standard procedure of putting on and 
removing all Personal Protective Equipment (PPE), 
including gown, goggles, N95 mask with face full 
shield and gloves.64 Before every treatment, patient 
should use a mouth rinse with 1% or 1.5% hydrogen 
peroxide or 0.2% povidone 9,64 and should wear goggles 
and bib during the whole procedure. To minimize 
the aerosol production, dentists should use hand 
instrumentation, high-volume saliva ejector and 
dental dam during the treatment and refrain to use 
3-in-1 syringe.61 

Intraoral radiographs should be avoided since 
it can induce coughing; the office space should 
be limited to the patient and to the operator and 
dental assistant. After the treatment, the DCHP 
should wear appropriate PPE to proceed with the 
cleaning and disinfection of the room and equipment 
using the recommended disinfecting products.64 
Besides, dentists should reconsider the use of sedation 
(inhalation and pharmacological) to manage severe 
anxiety or phobia in the dental settings and focus 
on non-pharmacological techniques to minimize the 
potential risk of needing life support measures that 
involve the manipulation of airways and aerosolization 
(inhalation sedation).8

In a specific situation where the patient has an 
unavoidable emergency and no signs and symptoms 
of COVID-19 and the dentist does not have a N95 
mask or higher level, he/she must wear surgical 
mask in a single use, goggles and face shield to treat 
a patient, but be aware that the risk of contamination 
will be moderate.64 There is a limitation in following 
this procedure since there is current community 
spread of COVID-19 with asymptomatic cases in 
the population. Current research shows that the 
prognosis of patients with COVID-19 is worst for those 
older than 60 years of age or presenting underlying 
diseases (diabetes, hypertension or cardiovascular 
disease, for example).70 In this sense, members of the 
health team must use clinical judgment and take all 
precautions to prevent transmission. 

In this unprecedented situation, it is advisable 
to look for and apply the most recent protocols and 
guidance from your local dental organizations in 
your country that are based in the current literature 
and be aware that the COVID-19 pandemic brings 
challenges to the dental health care providers 
not only on their practices but on their financial 
situation as well. A general flowchart (Figure) was 
constructed based on the ADA’s Interim guidance 
on minimizing COVID-19 transmission risk when 
treating dental emergencies.64 As also stated in this 
ADA’s document,64 Figure 1 does not constitute legal 
advice or legal guidance. It only helps clinicians 
for their own judgment about the risks of infection 
while working in dental offices. 

Health professionals are facing new challenges in 
providing care to their patients. Remote treatment via 
chat, video conversation, telemedicine, teledentistry 
and other technologies have given rise to a new look 
at the professional-patient relationship, opening 
doors to an untapped universe, since most dentists 
do not use them as part of their daily work.71It is 
estimated that by 2025 over 60% of the population 
will be using mobile internet.72 Therefore, mobile 
technologies, including phones, are great allies to 
community health even in low and middle-income 
population.73–75 Individuals that still do not have 
access to mobile services would also benefit due to 
diminishing waiting lines in local health assistance, 
at the nearest Primary Health Units. 

In private offices, the limitation on dental and 
medical activities to only urgent and emergency 
procedures presents a strong impact on the economy 
of these sectors.76 This economic crises have raised 
reflections and concerns that go beyond clinical 
security and social detachment and have highlighted 
the importance of social security and financial 
education. Such factors must also be taken into account 
by the entities that guide dental practice, in order to 
generate discussions to support the dentists on those 
occasions where they will have to keep distance from 
their routine clinical tasks during COVID-19.

The dental class, which comprises in its vast 
majority, autonomous professionals, should recover 
the issues of financial education, frequently so distant 
from the contents of the academic curriculum. There 
is an evident scarcity of articles related to financial 
education for dental offices. Emergency financial 
reserve, funds to deposit this reserve and long-term 
investments, public or private pension, should be 
part of the incisive recommendations to this group. 
Other professional classes are raising these issues 
concerning this urgent moment to guarantee social 
security for all and to go beyond the packages 
proposed by governments.77 Such strategies must 
be sustainable, long-term, with a view to protecting 
the self-employed and avoiding an unprecedented 
economic crisis. 

This recent COVID-19 turned into a global public 
health outbreak. It is transmitted after contact with 
infected surfaces and with infected patient’s fluids, 
including saliva and aerosol. A substantial number 
of individuals do not show any signs and symptoms 
and may disseminate the virus. These characteristics 
put the dental offices as main risk settings of cross 
infection among patients and dentists. Currently 
there is no effective treatment and fast diagnosis is 
still a challenge. All elective dental treatments and 
non-essential procedures should be postponed, 
keeping only urgent and emergency visits to the dental 
office.  Unexpected situations like this pandemic, 
brings financial issues to the dental team; in this way, 
financial education become very important subject 
to be discussed during the professional school. The 
use of telecommunication (phone calls, text messages) 
and teledentistry are very promising tools to keep 
contact with the patient without put them in high 
risk of infection.

National Council for Scientific and Technological 
Development (Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento 
Científico and Tecnológico - CNPq), and the 
Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Education 
Personnel (Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Nível 
Superior - CAPES).
