Context and objective: While cases of COVID-19 disease increase daily worldwide, 
outbreaks of arboviral infections have affected health systems of countries in tropical 
regions. The outcomes for patients and health systems of a possible syndemic are not 
clarified yet. Thus, we aim to systematically review the literature searching for evidence 
that describes the clinical presentation, severity and prognostic of SARS-CoV-2 and 
Arboviral coinfection. 

Design and setting: Protocol for a rapid living systematic review, 
that will follow the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews recommendations. We 
will include prospective and retrospective cohort, case-control studies and case series of 
patients with confirmed diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2 and Arboviral infection. We will perform 
the search strategy with no language restrictions on Medline via PubMed, Embase via 
Elsevier, Cochrane Library - Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), 
Portal Regional BVS - LILACS, Scopus and WebOfScience to identify published, ongoing, 
and unpublished studies. The selection and extraction will be performed by two authors. 
We will perform the critical appraisal of included studies with the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale 
and the certainty of evidence will be evaluated using the Grading of Recommendations 
Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE). 

The outbreak of Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) has spread worldwide and the 
epidemiological picture is constantly evolving. Data updated as of April 29, 2020, count 
210 countries and territories around the world involved with almost 3 million confirmed 
cases and over 200,000 deaths (1).  

In the midst of this scenario, countries in tropical regions are also facing the issues of old 
endemic diseases (2). In Brazil, for example, until mid-March 2020 more than 600,000 
probable Dengue cases, almost 18,000 probable Chikungunya cases and over 2,000 
probable Zika cases were notified in the year. Mortality data add up to 224 in these human 
urban arboviruses (3). 

Epidemiologists alert to a possible temporal coincidence between Severe Acute 
Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and Dengue outbreaks in Brazil for 
the first semester of 2020 (4). The recent advances in the understanding of COVID-19 
have pointed to high similarity in pathophysiology events, as well as signs and symptoms 
of SARS-CoV-2 infection and arbovirus infection in general, such as fever and excessive 
systemic inflammatory response (2).  

This finding suggests a possible misdiagnosed scenario that can lead to serious 
implication of delayed diagnosis, wrong treatment and poor allocation of resources (2,4). 
However, it is not clear yet how the outcomes of a possible syndemic will be expressed 
in patients and health systems. Thus, we aim to systematically review the literature 
searching for evidence that describe the clinical presentation, severity and prognostic of 
a coinfection SARS-CoV-2 and Arboviruses, in order to provide support for decision-
makers in future scenarios of a possible syndemic.  

This study is a protocol to describe the rationale, hypothesis and planned methods of our 
systematic review. It was submitted for registration in the PROSPERO ‘‘International 
Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews’’ platform. Considering the scenario of need 
for instant evidence to respond to COVID-19 pandemic, we will perform a rapid living 
systematic review, abbreviating the method by running screens of titles and abstracts 
through one author. In addition, this study will adopt a living method, continually updating 
and incorporating new clinical trial registrations and relevant data as they become 
available 
This systematic process will follow the recommendations proposed by the Cochrane 
Collaboration Handbook (5). 

We will include cohort, case-control studies and case series that describe the clinical 
presentation, severity and prognostic of a coinfection SARS-CoV-2 and Arboviruses. 

We will include patients of any age tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 infection and positive 
for any type of Arbovirus infection (e.g. Dengue, Zika, Yellow Fever, among others). 

Patients coinfected with SARS-CoV-2 and any type of Arboviral infection. 

Patients mono infected with SARS-CoV-2. 

Outcome measures 

● Primary outcomes: mortality rate; length of hospital stay; disease severity. 

● Secondary outcomes: clinical characteristics; length of intensive care unit stay; 
Need for invasive mechanical ventilation; Hospitalization rate; Time to clinical 
improvement. 

We will include studies performed since November 2019, with no language restrictions as 
well as no publication site restrictions. 

We will search for studies on the database that follows: Medline via PubMed, Embase via 
Elsevier, Cochrane Library - Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), 
Portal Regional BVS - LILACS, Scopus and WebOfScince  adopting relevant descriptors 
and synonyms and adapting the search to the specifics of each database to identify 
published, ongoing, and unpublished studies.  
We will also search the following COVID-19 specific databases: Epistemonikos COVID-
19 L·OVE platform; ClinicalTrials; The World Health Organization International Clinical 
Trials Registry Platform (WHO ICTRP); Additionally, we will apply the technique of 
snowballing, searching the lists of references of the included studies. 

The search strategy will be developed with the terms that are related to the SARS-CoV-
2 in addition to all terms related to arboviral infection. There will be no language or 
publishing site restrictions. 

One author (KMM) will select the titles and abstracts of studies for inclusion on this review. 
If duplicated studies are found, only one of them will be considered for inclusion. When 
reports using the same participants, but with different outcome measurements or different 
assessment time points are found, both will be considered as parts of only one study. 
After removing duplicated studies, KMM will read the study titles and abstracts. Studies 
that clearly do not fulfill the eligibility criteria will be excluded and the remaining studies 
will then be fully read and assessed by two authors (APR and ACPNP) for inclusion in the 
review. Disagreements between authors related to this process will be solved by a third 
author (KMM). The reasons for the exclusion of studies will be described. To optimize the 
process of screening and selection of studies the Rayyan software (6) will be used.  

The data extraction will be conducted by two authors independently (CRRF and FSAR). 
Discrepancies or disagreements on this process will be discussed and, if necessary, 
solved by a third author (VFMT). We will develop a form to extract data from included 
studies, which will be used to insert data related to: (I) Demographic and clinical 
characteristics of the patients; (II) Time points used for the assessments; (III) 
Epidemiological characteristics (IV) Outcome measures; (V) Sources of funding; (VI) 
Possibility of conflict of interests. 

To assess the feasibility of performing a meta-analysis, we will also extract the following 
data for each primary and secondary outcome measure: (a) Total number of patients (in 
each group); (b) Number of events in each group (for dichotomous outcomes); (c) Mean, 
standard deviation, standard error, median, interquartile range, minimum, maximum, 95% 
confidence interval (CI) (for continuous outcomes); (d) p-value.  

We will perform the critical appraisal of included studies with the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale 
(7). The quality of evidence will be assessed using the Grading of Recommendations 
Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) (8). The critical appraisal and the 
assessment of the certainty of the evidence will be performed by two authors (NCJ and 
VTC), and all the disagreements related to the assessment of the critical appraisal or 
certainty of the evidence will be solved through discussion and, if necessary, by mediation 
from a third author (VFMT). 

This systematic review protocol was written as per the PRISMA-P guidelines (9). 

When at least two studies are sufficiently homogeneous in terms of design, participants, 
and outcome measurements, we will assess the possibility of pooling their results into 
meta-analysis. If insufficient information or heterogeneous studies are found, the results 
of the studies will be summarized only in qualitative synthesis. 

For evaluating prognosis, we will perform analyses according to the recommendations of 
Cochrane, and the Cochrane Prognosis Methods Group. To perform the meta-analysis 
we will use R software. When the response of interest is provided by continuous variable 
we will perform the analysis in terms of mean difference (MD) or Hedge’s/Cohen’s (SMD). 
In case of dichotomous response will pool a hazard ratios (unadjusted (crude) or 
adjusted) or odds ratio with their standard errors for hospital admission, intensive care 
unit admission and/or respiratory support for adult inpatients with COVID-19 and 
mortality. All others parameters as standard deviation (for MD or SMD, for instance) and 
each number of events (RR or OR, for instance) will be pooled. In all cases we will use 
the generic inverse variance method with random-effects model. The package to be used 
is the “meta” (version 4.11-0). 

For studies that do not provide a mean and associated standard deviation (SD), we will 
use information and results reported in the text or tables, doing the correct inference. 
When the parameters established before are not available, the estimate based on other 
parameters will be made ensuring the correct information. 

We will contact the principal investigators of the included studies asking for additional 
data or to clarify issues about the studies. In the absence of a reply from the authors, we 
will expose the data in a descriptive manner avoiding imputation. 

We will employ the Cochran’s Q test to assess the presence of heterogeneity considering 
a threshold of P value < 0.1 as an indicator of whether heterogeneity is present. In 
addition, we will assess statistical heterogeneity by examining the Higgins I2 statistic 
following these thresholds:   < 25%: no (none) heterogeneity; 25% to 49%: low 
heterogeneity;  50% to 74%: moderate heterogeneity;  ≥ 75%: high heterogeneity. 

The clinical presentation, severity and prognostic of a co-infection related to the SARS-
CoV-2 and an Arboviral infection have not been well established yet. However, it is 
already known that a syndemic scenario would be an additional challenge and burden for 
the healthcare and economic systems of endemic countries for arboviral diseases (4). In 
our view, finding reliable evidence for the development of actions to fight COVID-19 
situation is an important and urgent strategic objective. Thus, this rapid living review will 
systematically assess the best available evidence to respond to this scenario and to 
provide reliable information for decision-makers. 
