(A first review of Gasteroid fungi (Agaricomycetes, Basidiomycota) in Paraguay). 
Based on the available literature, a list of 40 gasteroid species recorded in Paraguay since the earliest 
known collection is presented. A total of forty species are reported, distributed among 16 genera and 
4 families. This work represents the first compilation of data available on this group of fungi for 
Paraguay. These numbers reveal the scarce amount of species formally cited for the Paraguayan 
Funga. 

Gasteroid fungi present a wide range of basidiomata structure and these distinctive 
characteristics lead to the designation of many genera as monotypic or with few species represented. 

The existing bibliographic information on the group of gasteroid Funga in the last century was 
limited to a few citations made by Spegazzinii (1884, 1888, 1891) who recorded 12 species from the 
country:Geastrum saccatum Fr. [as Geaster saccatus], Tulostoma cyclophorum Lloyd [as Tylostoma 
berteroanum], Lycoperdon lilacinum (Mont. & Berk.) Speg., Lycoperdon pseudo-lilacinum Speg., 
Lycoperdon pseudogemmatum Speg., Simblum sphaerocephalum Schltdl., Geastrum saccatum 
[Geaster spegazzinianus], Lanopila guaranitica Speg., Bovista dubiosa Speg. and Lycoperdon 
scleroderma Speg. 

Most of the new citations were made by contemporary mycologists since the last publication 
of Spegazzini, 122 years ago. The next recording of gasteroid fungi in the country occurred in 2013 
(Campi et al. 2013), and more recent studies have been carried out by Campi and collaborators 
(Campi et al. 2015, Campi & Maubet 2015a, 2015b, Campi et al. 2017, Maubet et al. 2018) 

In the last decade the record of gasteroid fungi has increased but despite the efforts of 
mycologists in recent years, knowledge about the gasteroid mycobiota in Paraguay remains scattered 
and incomplete since the collections have been made sporadically and in very few areas.  

Paraguay comprises two distinct geographical regions, the eastern and western, which are 
separated by the Paraguay River. The western region is also known as the Chaco. Which include 3 
ecoregions: Humid Chaco, Dry Chaco, and Pantanal. The ecoregions of eastern Paraguay includes 
the Humid Chaco, Atlantic Forest, and Cerrado (Dinerstein et al. 1995). 

This study is a revision of the available data and an update of the records of species of 
gasteroid fungi from Paraguay. 

This checklist has been compiled based on literature records of gasteroid fungi recorded from 
Paraguay. The information retrieved from the literature includes distribution records per department 
(figure 1), notes about habitat and substrate, and detailed descriptions and remarks of the basidiomata. 
The current taxonomic position is indicated, as have been described in previous publications and a 
brief introduction of the most outstanding characteristics of each species is provided. The 
classification and nomenclature followed the database Mycobank (http://www.mycobank.org). 
Genera and species are listed alphabetically (table 1) and the authorities for the binomials, as well as 
the author names and spellings, are in accordance to Robert et al. (2005) database.  

The 40 gasteroid fungi species recorded in Paraguay are distributed among 16 genera and four 
families. The most highly represented family is Agaricaceae with 14 species (39%), followed by 
Phallaceae and Geastraceae (with 10 species each respectively, 28%). Geastrum is the genus with the 
highest number of species with nine taxa (25%). The departments with the most records were the 
Central department, corresponding to the humid Chaco ecoregion, with 19 records (47.5%) and the 
Paraguarí department, corresponding to the transition ecoregion between humid Chaco and Atlantic 
Forest, with 15 records (37.5%), two species of gasteroid fungi were cited for the Atlantic Forest 
ecoregion (5%), eight species for the Pantanal ecoregion (20%) and two species for the dry Chaco 
(5%). 

It is not possible to speak of the most represented species in terms of distribution since the 
country lacks extensive samplings to represent all the ecoregions appropriately. Dring (1973) and 
Miller & Miller (1988) estimated a hundred genera of gasteromycetes, therefore the diversity of this 
group is still not well represented in Paraguay, since only 15 genera are recorded in the literature. 

Agaricaceae Chevall. 

Battarrea phalloides (Dicks.) Pers. 

Basionym: Lycoperdon phalloides Dicks. 

Locality: BO (Campi et al. 2016b). 

Identification. Species easily recognizable for presenting a high basidiome about 10-30 cm including 
the spore sac, rapid development, rust in color, stipe expending up to 25 cm in length and bearing a 
spore sac; exoperidium remaining as a volva and apically as scales on the endoperidium; 
endoperidium and spore sac hemispherical to conical, 2.8 cm to 7.2 cm in diam., later splitting circular 
along the middle and deteriorating. Volva membranous up to 15 cm in diameter, presenting similar 
color and surface as the stipe, partially adhered to the stipe base (Rea 1942, Garrido-Benavent 2014, 
Campi et al. 2016b). 

Calvatia cyathiformis (Bosc) Morgan 

Basionym: Lycoperdon cyathiforme Bosc 

Localities: CE (Campi et al. in press) 

Identification. The main characteristic of this species is a globose, compact basidiome when young, 
which develop a basal portion like an inverted pear or a loaf of bread at maturity. The surface can be 
commonly brown and broken up into mosaic-like scales. The gleba is purplish and pulverulent at 
maturity (Zeller & Smith 1964, Morales & Kimbrough 1978). 

Calvatia rugosa (Berk. & M.A. Curtis) D.A. Reid 

Basionym: Lycoperdon rugosum Berk. & M.A. Curtis 

Locality: SP, AP (Campi & Maubet 2016, Campi et al. in press) 

Identification. The main characteristic is the presence of the orange pigment that stains the basidioma 
when it is cut (Cortez et al. 2008). Another distinctive feature is its long rhizomorphic extension of 
20-200 mm in diameter and 10-100 mm high, which folds at the base and is attached by one or more 
thin rhizomorphs (Wright & Albertó 2006). 

Calvatia lilacina (Mont. & Berk.) Henn 

Basionym: Bovista lilacina Berk. & Mont. 

Locality: PR (Spegazzini 1884, 1888). 

Identification. Bates et al. (2009) reported Calvatia lilacina as a synonym of Calvatia fragilis in 
Arizona, USA. On the other hand both species are treated as independent by Trierveiler-Pereira & 
Baseia (2009) in Brazil. Cortez et al. (2012) consider this species a synonym of C. cyathiformis but 
other authors differ and consider C. cyathiformis as a different species (Verma et al. 2018). 

Comments: C. lilacina was recorded for Spegazzinii (1884) as Lycoperdon lilacinum. 

Cyathus earlei Lloyd 

Locality: PR (Campi et al. in press). 

Identification. This species is characterized by an exoperidium without plication, covered by a light 
color tomentum, organized in small tufts, endoperidium smooth or inconspicuously plicate, with a 
light, shiny color, contrasting with the exterior layer and peridioles with a double-layer cortex (Cruz 
et al. 2014). 

Cyathus limbatus Tul. & C. Tul  

Basionym: Cyathodes limbatum (Tul. & C. Tul.) 

Localities: AP, CE, PR (Maubet et al. 2017, Campi et al. in press). 

Identification. This species is characterized by having plicate peridium on the internal and external 
surface, large peridioles (7-10 mm × 6-7 mm) with bilayered cortex, dark brown to black peridioles 
and basidiospores of 10-12 × 16-22 μm. Another distinctive feature of the species is that at the base 
of the pseudostipe a woolly golden brown subicule is formed (Brodie & Dennis 1954, Trierveiler-
Pereira & Baseia 2010). 

Cyathus poeppigii Tul. & C. Tul 

Basionym: Cyathodes poeppigii (Tul. & C. Tul.) 

Localities: CE (Campi & Maubet 2015a, Maubet et al. 2017). 

Identification. The most remarkable diagnostic characteristics of the species are the large size of the 
basidiospores (20-28 × 30-42 µm) and the deep internal and external striations of the peridium 
(Brodie and Dennis 1954). 

Cyathus setosus H.J. Brodie 

Localities: PR (Maubet et al. 2017). 

Identification. C. setosus is characterized by a conical peridium, of intense dark brown coloration, 
smooth external surface and a slightly plicated internal surface, with dark conspicuous setae 0.5-1 
mm long, large peridioles without a tunic, double cortex, and a small subiculum (Brodie 1967, 
Trierveiler-Pereira & Baseia 2013). 

Cyathus stercoreus (Schwein.) De Toni 

Basionym: Nidularia stercorea Schwein. 

Locality: CG, PR, SP (Maubet et al. 2017, Campi et al. 2013b). 

Identification. The morphological characteristics of the species are the absence of folds, either internal 
or external, in the peridium, the presence of hairs grouped into golden brown strands covering the 
entire basidioma in the immature state, these hairs fall with age leaving the peridium with smooth 
appearance at maturity and taking a dark color ranging from light brown to gray (Maubet et al. 2017). 

Cyathus striatus (Huds.) Willd. 

Basionym: Peziza striata Huds. 

Locality: AR (Gullón 2011). 

Identification. Easy to recognize by the hirsute exoperidium with a shiny and striate inner surface. 
Microscopically, it has large ovoid basidiospores (14-17 × 7-9) (Baseia & Milanez 2001). 

Podaxis pistillaris (L.) Fr. 

Basionym: Lycoperdon pistillare L. 

Localities: BO, CR (Campi et al. 2015b, Campi et al. in press). 

Identification. This species is characterized by the hard and fibrous pseudostipe that penetrates the 
gleba. The gleba is covered by a scaly, sub-cylindrical peridium which turns dark and powdery in the 
mature stage (Morse 1933). 

Lycoperdon pseudogemmatum Speg. 

Locality: PR (Spegazzinii 1884). 

Identification. Cortez et al. (2013) consider this species a possible synonym of Lycoperdon perlatum, 
a highly variable species, which is characterized by the presence of spines in the conical exoperidium 
with a rounded apex. 

Lycoperdon pseudolilacinum Speg. 

Locality: PR (Spegazzinii 1884). 

Identification. This species resembles L. lilacinum but differs in the color of the gleba and the very 
fragile peridium (Spegazzini 1884). 

Tulostoma cyclophorum Lloyd 

Basionym: Tulostoma berteroanum f. pampeanum Speg. 

Locality: CE, PR (Spegazzini 1884, Campi et al. 2016a). 

Identification. This species is easily distinguishable by persistent membranous exoperidium in old 
specimens, endoperidium with a velvety texture and abundant mycosclereids well visible to the 
stereoscope on its surface, a mamiform and fimbriated mouth, and by the globose basidiospores with 
ridges which offer a characteristic cross-linked to sub-crosslinked morphology (Campi et al. 2016a). 

Comments: This species was recorded as Tulostoma berteroanum by Spegazzini (1884). 

Tulostoma pygmaeum Lloyd 

Locality: PR (Campi et al. in press) 

Identification. This species is characterized by its tubular mouth, hyphal exoperidium, and 
basidiospores with a distinct verrucose ornamentation (Moreno et al. 1995). 

Vascellum pampeanum (Speg.) Homrich, in Homrich & Wright 

Basionym: Lycoperdon pampeanum Speg. 

Locality: CE (Campi & Maubet 2016). 

Identification. V. pampeanum is characterized by having a diaphragm that separates the gleba from 
the subgleba, the presence of mycosclereids on the surface of the exoperidium and the presence of 
eucapilicium (Homrich & Wright 1988). 

Geastraceae Corda 

Geastrum argentinum (Speg.)  

Basionym: Geastrum argentines Speg. 

Locality: AP (Campi et al. 2018). 

Identification. G. argentinum is characterized by emerging from a whitish subicule and by an external 
surface of the velvety mycelial layer which is detached from fibrous tissue (Zamora et al. 2014).  

Geastrum coronatum Pers. 

Basionym: Geastrum limbatum Fr. 

Locality: CE (Campi & Maubet 2015b). 

Identification. This species is mainly characterized by arched basidiomata, dark brown and asperulate 
endoperidium, a myceliar layer covered with abundant debris, a fibrillose peristome, larger pedicel 
(up to 4 mm high), and basidiospores with prominent truncate warts (Sunhede 1989, Soto & Wright 
2000, Alves & Cortez 2016). 

Geastrum hariotii Lloyd 

Basionym: Geaster harioti Lloyd 

Locality: AP (Campi et al. 2018). 

Identification. The species is characterized by having non-hygroscopic exoperidium, endoperidium 
sessile or with a very short stipe, peristoma strongly plicated and well defined. (Trierveiler-Pereira & 
Silveira 2012). 

Geastrum minimum Schwein. 

Locality: CE (Campi et al. 2015a). 

Identification. G. minimum is normally treated as a single, rather variable species, mostly small-sized 
and often showing quite large crystals of calcium oxalate on the endoperidial surface (Zamora et al. 
2014) 

Geastrum pampeanum var. pallidum Speg. 

Basionym: Geastrum pampeanus var. pallidus Speg. 

Locality: AP (Campi et al. 2018). 

Identification. This species is characterized by a small basidiomata (17-30 mm wide), non-
hygroscopic exoperidium, sessile endoperidium and basidiospores of 3.5-5 μm diam. (Campi et al. 
2018). 

Geastrum pusillipilosum J.O. Sousa, Alfredo, R.J. Ferreira, M.P Martín & Baseia 

Locality: PR (Campi et al. in press). 

Identification. Recognized by a small basidiomata (up to 17 mm wide), an exoperidium covered with 
short hairs (up to 1 mm), a fibrillose peristome and basidiospores of 4.4-6 × 4.3-5.9 (-6.8) μm diam 
(Crous et al. 2016, Lima & Baseia 2018). 

Geastrum saccatum Fr. 

Localities: AP, CE, PR (Spegazzini 1884, Campi et al. 2018). 

Identification. This species is characterized by a large basidiomata (up to 8 cm in diameter), involute 
lacinias, non-hygroscopic, a prominent conspicuous collar around the endoperidium from the 
pseudoparenchymal layer of exoperidium, sessile endoperidium, delimited or unbounded fibrous 
peristoma (Sunhede 1989). 

Geastrum schweinitzii (Berk. & M.A. Curtis) Zeller 

Basionym: Coilomyces schweinitzii Berk. & M.A. Curtis 

Locality: CE (Campi & Maubet 2015b).  

Identification. This species is recognized by small cespitose basidiomata and by the presence of a 
white to yellowish, subiculum that spreads throughout the substrate, which is generally decomposing 
wood (Baseia et al. 2003). Some specimens previously identified as G. schweinitzii for the neotropics 
were different species based on phylogenetic analysis and thus the species could be endemic of the 
region were the type material was collected (Accioly et al. 2019) 

Geastrum triplex Jungh. in Tijdschr 

Locality: SP, CE, AP (Campi et al. 2013b, Campi et al. 2018).  

Identification. This species is characterized by large basidiomata (up to 8 cm in diameter), involute 
lacinias, non-hygroscopic, prominent conspicuous collar around the endoperidium from the 
pseudoparenchymal layer of exoperidium, sessile endoperidium, delimited or unbounded fibrous 
peristoma. (Campi et al. 2018). Recent phylogenetic studies suggest that the morphological concept 
of the species actually represents an assemblage of closely related species which vary in the 
distribution patterns (Kasuya et al. 2012). 

Geastrum violaceum Rick 

Locality: AR (Campi et al. 2013a). 

Identification. This species is mainly distinguished by the pink, red to pale violet color of the 
exoperidium, a character that easily separates it from other species of the genus (Trierveiler-Pereira 
& Silveira 2012). 

Myriostoma calongei Baseia, J.O. Sousa & M.P. Martín 

Locality: PR (Campi et al. in press). 

Identification. This species is characterized by a verrucose endoperidium, with prominent triangular 
processes and could be restricted to South America (Sousa et al. 2017). 

Phallaceae Corda 

Blumenavia rhacodes Möller 

Locality: CR (Campi et al. in press). 

Identification. The species is characterized by a pale orange to greyish orange (beige) receptacle 
consisting of 3-5 columns, and glebifers occuring on lateral expansions (“teeth”) distributed along 
the column’s margins (Trierveiler-Pereira et al. 2019, Melanda et al. 2020). 

Clathrus argentinus Domínguez 

Locality: CE (Campi et al. in press). 

Identification. This species is characterized by having the receptacle arms not joined at the base and 
a strongly yellow basal mycelium, and glebiferous zones with digitiform extensions, are at the 
intersection of the arms that form the network (Domínguez de Toledo 1985). 

Clathrus chrysomycelinus Möller 

Basionym: Clathrella chrysomycelina (Möller) E. Fisch. 

Locality: PR (Maubet et al. 2018). 

Identification. This species is characterized by obovoid, perforate, white to yellowish receptacle, 
isodiametric meshes, having the receptacle arms joined at the base and a strong yellow basal 
mycelium. In addition, the glebe is confined to glebifers at the inner side of the arm’s intersections 
(Dring et al. 1971, Dring 1980).  

Comments: Maubet et al. (2018) mention that the material was collected in Ybycui city, reviewing 
the herbarium material, the right collection site corresponds to Piribebuy city, Cordillera Department. 

Clathrus columnatus Bosc 

Basionym: Laternea columnata (Bosc) Nees  

Locality: CE (Campi et al. 2017). 

Identification. Species characterized by having 2-5 robust spongy reddish to orange columns free at 
the base and fused at the apex. The gleba is spread on the internal portion of the columns and not 
confined to a glebifer (Sandoval-Leiva et al. 2014, Magnago et al. 2013). 

Clathrus crispus Turpin 

Basionym: Clathrella crispa (Turpin) E. Fisch.  

Locality: AP (Maubet et al. 2018). 

Identification. This species is characterized by having a small receptacle (5 cm or less, some larger 
up to 15 cm), globose to subglobose of reddish coloration, with somewhat regular meshes (usually 
round at the apex and more elongated towards the base) and with a corrugated and folded membrane 
surrounding the meshes where the gleba is located (Dring 1980).  

Itajahya galericulata Möller, Bras. 

Localities: CE, PR (Campi et al. 2017, in press). 

Identification. Characterized by massive ‘eggs’ (3‒8 cm high), a white pseudostipe, a hemispherical, 
wig-like receptacle with a flat apex that is covered with a calyptra (membranous cap) (Trierveiler-
Pereira et al. 2019).  

Itajahya rosea (Delile) E. Fisch. 

Basionym: Phallus roseus Delile 

Localities: CE (Campi et al. 2017) 

Identification. This species, which has a phalloid shape, is characterized by the presence of a calyptra 
at the apex of the receptacle and the pinkish pseudostipe (Ottoni et al. 2010). 

Lysurus sphaerocephalum (Schltdl.) Hern. Caff., Urcelay, Hosaka & L.S. Domínguez  

Basionym: Simblum sphaerocephalum Schltdl. 

Localities: CE, PR (Spegazzini 1891, Campi et al. in press) 

Identification. The diagnostic features of the species are the fertile portion of the receptacle that is an 
irregular net, reddish, enclosing the stipe, which exceeds the stipe width. Stipe reddish and stylized, 
length clearly exceeds width, not striate (Hernández-Caffot et al. 2018). 

Mutinus argentinus Speg. 

Localities: CE, CR (Campi et al. 2017, Maubet et al. 2018). 

Identification. The species is characterized by a pinkish pseudostipe that tapers towards the apex, and 
a granulose, bright red fertile part with a small pore at the tip when mature (Trierveiler-Pereira et al. 
2019). 

Comments: Maubet et al. (2018) mention that the material was collected in Ybycui city, reviewing 
the herbarium material the right collection site corresponds to Piribebuy city, Cordillera Department. 

Phallus campanulatus Berk. 

Locality: CE (Campi et al. in press) 

Identification. The species is characterized by a whitish pseudostipe with small perforations, an off 
white, perforate, narrow campanulate, wrinkled to minutely rugulose receptacle with a toothed 
margin. The pore at the receptacle apex is so prominent that a ring-like structure can be observed 
around it (Trierveiler-Pereira et al. 2019). 

Phallus indusiatus Vent. 

Localities: CE (Maubet et al. 2018). 

Identification. The species is characterized by a whitish pseudostipe, a reticulate, white receptacle 
and the long, white indusium. Mycelial strands are often abundant and have purplish pigments 
(Trierveiler-Pereira et al. 2019). 

Sclerodermataceae Corda 

Pisolithus arhizus (Scop.) Rauschert 

Basionym: Lycoperdon arrizon Scop. 

Locality: CE (Campi et al. 2015a) 

Identification. This species is recognized by its epigeous, globose basidiomata, echinate basidiospores 
(Campi et al. 2015a). 

Scleroderma bovista Fr. 

Locality: CE (Campi et al. 2015a) 

Identification. The species is characterized by the presence of a smooth yellowish-brown peridium, 
with some reddish dark brown areas, basidiospores (11‒) 12‒14 (‒16) µm in diameter, with a well-
developed crosshair (Nouhra et al. 2012). 

This work was carried out within the framework of the project PINV18-699 “Development of 
molecular tools for the taxonomic identification of fungi from 3 Ecoregions of Paraguay”, funded by 
the Consejo Nacional de Ciencias y Tecnología (CONACYT). The authors thanks to Professor 
Andrea Weiler, for the contribution with the map. Anonymous reviewers are generous acknowledged, 
for discussions and comments that improved the manuscript. Sc. Andrew G. Cervantes is 
acknowledged, for the revision of the manuscript’s English and for the valuable contribution to the 
writing. 
