Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection depends on viral polyprotein processing, catalysed by 
the main proteinase (Mpro). The solution of the SARS-CoV-2 Mpro structure allowed the investigation of potential inhibitors. 
This work aims to provide first evidences of the applicability of commercially approved drugs to treat coronavirus disease-19 
(COVID-19). We screened 4,334 compounds to found potential inhibitors of SARS-CoV-2 replication using an in silico approach. 
Our results evidenced the potential use of coagulation modifiers in COVID-19 treatment due to the structural similarity of 
SARS-CoV-2 Mpro and human coagulation factors thrombin and Factor Xa. Further in vitro and in vivo analysis are needed to 
corroborate these results.

Humanity is trying to understand coronavirus dis­
ease-19 (COVID-19) at the same time severe acute respi­ratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection 
overcomes frontiers and spreads out through the world. 
Four human infecting species of coronavirus (HcoV-
229E, HcoV-OC43, HcoV-NL63, and HcqV-HKU1) were 
already known as causative agent of cold and pneumo­nia; this viral family was responsible for the SARS-CoV 
and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS-CoV) 
outbreaks. The consequences from the species that 
emerged from Wuhan, China are far more catastrophic.

SARS-CoV-2 infection depends on viral polyprotein 
processing, an event catalysed by the main proteinase 
(Mpro) (also known as 3CLpro). Since Mpro is unique 
in the virus and not found in the host cells, this protein 
is a prominent target for the development of antivirals 
against coronavirus infections.(1) Recently, the solution 
of the SARS-CoV-2 Mpro tridimensional structure al­lowed the investigation of potential inhibitors of viral 
replication. Mpro is composed of three domains (I- chy­
motrypsin, II- picornavirus 3C protease-like and III-
globular cluster involved in protein dimerisation) and 
crystallography structures indicate the region between 
domains I and II for protein activity inhibition. That re­gion contains the catalytic cysteine 145.

The crystal structure of SARS-CoV-2 Mpro was 
published by Zhang et al.(2) We selected a list of exist­ing antivirals drugs (64 compounds) and protease inhibi­tors (80 compounds) from the Drugbank Database(3) as 
ligands. The DrugBank database was used for a larger 
screening, evaluating 4190 compounds randomly 
se­lected. The crystal protein structure (PDB 6Y2E) was 
energy-minimised using MMTK package on Chimera 
version 1.14.(4) In silico molecular docking of ligand 
selection was performed using PyRx-virtual screening 
tool consisting of AutoDock(5) and AutoDockvina.(6)

The PyRx-virtual screening tool was used for dock­ing with the protocol: (i) the SARS-CoV-2 Mpro protein 
structure (PDB 6Y2E) was checked for missing atoms, 
bonds and contacts, removal of water molecules and en­ergy minimisation was done with following parameters, 
force field: Amber ff14SB, steepest descent steps: 100, 
steepest descent step size: 0.02 Å, conjugate gradient 
steps: 10, conjugate gradient step size: 0.02 Å using mo­lecular modelling toolkit (MMTK) package on Chimera 
version 1.14.(4) This minimised structure was used as the 
receptor for docking analysis. (ii) The minimised struc­ture was saved as a pdb file and imported into PyRx soft­ware. (iii) Ligands are imported in pdb format as well. 
Autodock Tools module was used to generate pdbqt input 
files. (iv) Autodock Vina algorithm was used to perform 
docking with the selected ligands. In Autodock Vina the 
grid box was set to cover the active site of Mpro with 
the following dimensions in Å: centre (x, y, z) = (-16.46, 
-26.70, 1.58), dimensions (x, y, z) = (23.34, 19.09, 10.98). 
The docking simulation was then run at an exhaustive­ness of eight. The docking results were evaluated using 
the lowest Binding Affinity score (kcal/mol) predicted by 
the build in scoring function of Autodock Vina module.

The results showed 1,321 molecules with scores above 
6.5 as Mpro partners [Supplementary data (Table)]. 
Due to the urgency in providing therapeutics to patients, 
we focus on the analysis of commercially approved 
drugs. Argatroban (blood clotting), Linagliptin (diabe­
tes), Saquinavir (antiviral), Edoxaban (blood clotting), 
Apixaban (blood clotting), Cilazapril (ACE inhibitor), 
Betrixaban (blood clotting), Alogliptin (dipeptidyl pepti­
dase 4 inhibitors), Sitagliptin (dipeptidyl peptidase 4 in­
hibitors), Ramipril (ACE inhibitor), Lopinavir (antiviral), 
Saxagliptin (diabetes), Indinavir (antiviral), Zofenopril 
(ACE inhibitor), Nelfinavir (antiviral), Quinapril (ACE 
inhibitor), Dihydroergotamine (antimigraine agents), 

Risperidone (atypical antipsychotics), Astemizole (anti­histamine) presented the higher scores (Fig. 1). The list 
includes antiviral components (as expected) and drugs 
classified as coagulation modifiers (4) and ACE inhibi­tors (4).

Lin et al.(7) propose a pathogenic mechanism for the 
disease, based on clinical evidence and studies of other 
coronavirus strains. They divide the clinical phase in the 
viraemia phase, acute phase and the recovery. The spe­cific effects of COVID-19 on the cardiovascular system 
remain unclear, though there have been reports of acute 
cardiac injury, arrhythmias, hypotension, tachycardia, 
and a high proportion of concomitant cardiovascular 
disease in infected individuals, particularly those who 
require more intensive care.(8) Also, there are signs of 
coagulopathy in many patients, usually associated with 
death.(9) Among coagulation modifiers, Argatroban is a 
direct thrombin inhibitor(10) for prophylaxis or treatment 
of thrombosis in patients with heparin-induced thrombo­
cytopenia. The three other compounds (Edoxaban, Apix­aban, Betrixaban) bind to factor Xa.(11) Edoxaban is used 
to prevent stroke and systemic embolism in patients with 
atrial fibrillation.(12) Apixaban is indicated for the control 
of recurrence of thromboembolic events, such as stroke in 
patients with non-valve atrial fibrillation. Betrixaban in­hibits free and prothrombinase bound factor Xa in a con­
centration-dependent manner.(13,14) Betrixaban was more 
potent at inhibiting thrombin-antithrombin complex.(15)

Superposing of SARS-CoV-2 Mpro with factor Xa and 
thrombin structures presents a rmsd value of 2.57Ᾰ and 
2.49Ᾰ, respectively. These low values are an indication of 
fold similarity (Fig. 2A-B). Thrombin, the known target 
of Argabotran, is a serine protease(16) as Mpro is a pro­tease itself with Leu-Gln↓(Ser,Ala,Gly) as a recognition 
sequence.(2) This similarity may indicate a direct pertur­bation in pro-clotting coagulation by COVID-19 through 
Mpro protein. In fact, changes in pro-clotting factors 
in COVID-19 patients were already detected showing 
significant decreased antithrombin (AT) values and in­creased D-dimer, fibrin/fibrinogen degradation products 
(FDP) and fibrinogen (FIB).(17) Additionally, the gradual 
progression of disease severity was mirrored by increas­ing values of D-dimer and FDP. This pattern might indi­cate the activation of a coagulation system due to throm­bosis or disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC).
(18) Heparin, as an anticoagulant therapy, was associated 
with a better prognosis in some patients.(9) Also, the risk 
of developing DIC due to SARS-CoV-2 infection which 
has an obvious negative impact on the prognosis,(19,20) was 
previously speculated.(21) Moreover, excessive activation 
of fibrinolysis may be observed during cardiopulmonary 
bypass also leading to DIC and haemorrhage.(22)

The feasibility and robustness	
of our interactions 
are strengthened by comparing the docking results of 
thrombin interaction with Argatroban and the correspond­ing crystallographic structure deposited under the code 
4HFP. Both structures present a rmsd of 0.49Ᾰ, indicat­ing both docking and experimental structures are almost 
identical (Fig. 2C). In addition, the comparison of dock­ing results of factor Xa interaction with Apixaban and the 
corresponding crystallographic structure deposited under 
the code 2P16 present a rmsd of 0.11Ᾰ, which also cor­roborates with the assertiveness of our approach (Fig. 2D). 
Finally, it is important to highlight that the score of throm­
bin interaction with Argatroban is 9.6 kcal/mol against 8.3 
kcal/mol with SARS-CoV-2 Mpro. Otherwise, Apixaban 
interaction with Factor Xa presents a score of 5.1 kcal/mol 
against 7.0 kcal/mol with SARS-Cov-2 [Supplementary 
data (Table)]. All these are preliminary evidence that Ar­gatroban has more affinity to Thrombin, but Apixaban 
tends to have more affinity to SARS-CoV-2 Mpro.

We also performed fold similarity investigation for 
the ACE inhibitors (ACEIs) with Mpro. The high rmsd 
values (6.03 Ᾰ and 5.57 Ᾰ for the ACE receptors struc­tures deposited under the codes 2X92 and 2EWB, re­
spectively) indicate the low structural conservation 
among those proteins. Also, the use of ACE inhibitors 
contributes for the up-regulation of ACE2 expression.
(23,24) Even as a potential target for the treatment of coro­navirus infection, some groups suggest that the use of 
these inhibitors could lead to higher viral loads, because 
the ACE2 augmented expression.(25) This could be a 
drawback for the use of ACEIs as COVID19 treatment.

In conclusion, we show the potential applicability of 
some coagulation compounds for the first time to our 
knowledge to treat COVID-19 infection. We highlight 
the fold similarity among SARS-CoV-2 Mpro and co­agulation factors thrombin and Factor Xa. The effects 
of this similarity should urgently be investigated by in 
vitro approaches.

Acknowledgements to Dr Paulo Costa Carvalho and Dr Maria da Gloria 
Carvalho for assistance in correction and preparation of the 
manuscript. We would also like to thank Ms Stephanie Mo­rais for kindly downloading the structures of some inhibitors 
and Marlon DM Santos for the assistance with computational 
requirements.
