(A new species of Vriesea Lindl. (Bromeliaceae) from the Atlantic Rainforest of 
São Paulo State, Brazil). A new species of Vriesea Lindl. is described and illustrated. Vriesea 
altobocainensis is only known for the Atlantic Forest of Serra da Bocaina. It is a robust epiphyte, 
characterized by a reddish inflorescence, and floral and primary bracts with an orbicular and 
broadly ovate shape; morphologically, it is close to Vriesea altodaserrae L.B.Sm. and Vriesea 
sceptrum Mez. However, the new species can be distinguished from these others mainly for the 
color, dimensions and shape of floral and primary bracts, number of inflorescence branches and 
number of flowers per branch.  

Vriesea Lindl. is included in the subfamily Tillandsioideae, which, based on phylogenetic and 
morphological studies, has gone through segregation, with the establishment of new genera (Barfuss 
et al. 2016). In this new circumscription, Vriesea is characterized mainly for the presence of a stigma 
of the convolute blade II type (with lobes ± fused, spreading, strongly broadened, infundibuliform to 
umbrella-shaped), petals usually bearing basal appendages (Barfuss et al. 2016). They are epiphytic 
plants, terrestrial or rupiculous, and are mainly distributed throughout South America, with one of 
the main diversity centres being the Brazilian Atlantic Forest (Costa et al. 2007). According to Forzza 
et al. (2015), Vriesea is the richest genus of Bromeliaceae in Brazil with almost 230 species (Gouda 
et al. cont. updated). It is also among the most diverse genera (ca. 170 spp.) within the Atlantic 
Rainforest domain (BFG 2018, Flora do Brasil 2020 under construction).  

Serra da Bocaina is part of the Serra do Mar mountain range and is located along the boundaries of 
the States of São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro, in Southeastern Brazil. Serra da Bocaina is formed by 
large extensions of well-preserved Atlantic Rainforest, including several physiognomical formations 
like lowland forests, nebular forests and altitude fields. The diversity of physical attributes, such as 
the great topographical variation (rising from sea level to 2,088 m) with marked steep slopes and 
mountainous highlands, and the high pluvial rates (annual average of ca. 1,700 mm), have likely 
formed distinct niches and refuges, rendering high levels of biological diversity and endemism 
(IBAMA 2002, Freitas 2010).   

During our collecting expeditions in Serra da Bocaina, a new species of Vriesea was identified. Here, 
we describe and illustrate this new species. 

The species description was based on herbarium and fresh material, which were collected during the 
field expeditions to Serra da Bocaina, in areas surrounding the Parque Nacional da Serra da Bocaina 
(Serra da Bocaina National Park),  and deposited at SP Herbarium.   

In order to complement the information and evaluate the morphological characters, samples of the 
new species and the two species morphologically closest to it were carefully analysed.  

The measurement of the floral bracts was done in the structures of the middle of the inflorescence 
and additional information was obtained from specialized literature (Smith & Downs 1977, Reitz 
1983, Costa et al. 2007, Rosa 2011, Flora do Brasil 2020 under construction), as well as the Brazilian 
virtual herbarium Herbário Virtual REFLORA (Reflora cont. updated) and speciesLink network. 

Epiphytic plants. Leaf rosettes infundibuliform. Leaf-sheaths broadly elliptic, dark-brow, leaf-blades 
linear-lanceolate, apex acute-attenuate, mucronate. Peduncle bracts imbricate, the lower ones green, 
foliaceous and suberect; the upper ones with dilated sheaths, orbicular, reddish, blades suberect to 
patent, lanceolate, green. Inflorescence compound, heterothetic double raceme; branches 10-21, 
patent with an ascending to slightly sigmoid apical portion, bearing (8-)10-20 flowers; primary 
bracts longer than the peduncles of branches but shorter than the branches, red; peduncle of 
branches with 1-2 sterile bracts; rachilla red, slightly geniculate, internodes short, ca. 1 cm long. 
Floral bracts red or red with a yellow apex, orbicular to broadly-ovate, apex obtuse, apiculate, 
carinate. Flowers distichous, suberect in anthesis; sepals yellow; petals yellow, slightly orangish at 
the apex, apex rounded, petal appendages 2, longitudinally adnate to the petal, with superior free 
portion ovate or rhombic-ovate, apex rounded or obtuse, margins entire. Anthers included to slightly 
exserted; ovary cylindrical. Seeds with long funicles.  

Epiphytic plants, 0.8-1.7 m tall when flowering. Leaf rosettes infundibuliform. Leaf-sheaths 23 × 9-
14 cm, broadly elliptic, dark-brown; leaf-blades 36-72 × 5.5-7.5 cm, linear-lanceolate, green with 
some darker and tenuous transversal stripes, apex acute-attenuate, mucronate. Peduncle 50-63 cm 
long, erect, green or reddish towards the apex; peduncle bracts imbricate, the lower ones green, 
foliaceous, suberect, with sheaths ca. 5 × 6.5 cm, broadly-ovate, blades ca. 40 × 5.5 cm, narrowly 
triangular, becoming smaller towards the apex, the upper ones with dilated sheaths, ca. 6 × 7 cm, 
orbicular, reddish, blades suberect to patent, ca. 10 × 3 cm, lanceolate, green, apex attenuate, 
mucronate. Inflorescence compound, heterothetic double raceme, erect, 35-100 cm long; branches 
10-21, sometimes bracts with undeveloped branches at base and in the middle portion of the 
inflorescence, branches 13-30 cm long, usually patent with an ascending to slightly sigmoid apical 
portion, flowers (8-)10-20; primary bracts generally longer than the peduncles of branches but shorter 
than the branches, 4.5-12 × 6-8 cm, the lower ones distinctively bigger, similar to the bracts of the 
peduncle, with sheaths ca. 7 × 8 cm, reddish, dilated, blades 10 × 3 cm, lanceolate, green, patent, 
becoming smaller towards the apex, the upper ones shorter than the peduncle of the branches, ca. 4.5 
× 6 cm, orbicular, red, apex mucronate, without blades; peduncle of branches 2-8.5 cm long, each 
one with a sterile bract, the lower branches with up to 2 sterile bracts, similar to the floral bracts, ca. 
3.5 × 2.2-4 cm, carinate; rachilla red or reddish-green, slightly geniculate, internodes 0.8-1.1 cm long 
in the flowering branches and up to 2.2 cm long in the fruiting branches. Floral bracts 2.1-3.5 × 2-3 
cm, orbicular to broadly-ovate, almost completely embracing the base of the rachilla, apex obtuse, 
apiculate, carinate, red, equaling the length of sepals or only those in the distal portion of the branch 
red with a yellow apex and shorter than the sepals, suberect and imbricate before anthesis, subpatent 
and spaced after anthesis, exposing the rachilla. Flowers distichous, suberect in anthesis; sepals ca. 
2.5 × 1 cm, narrowly ovate, yellow, apex acute, mucronate, not carinate; petals ca. 3.2-3.5 × 0.7 cm, 
ligulate, yellow, slightly orange at the apex, apex rounded, petal appendages 2, bilateral to the 
antepetalous filament, longitudinally adnate to the petal for ca. 4 mm, superior free portion ovate to 
rhombic-ovate, apex rounded or obtuse, margins entire; stamens ca. 2.8 cm long, three free in the 
outer verticil, and three of the inner verticil epipetalous, adnate ca. 0.4 cm, anthers ca. 0.5 cm long, 
linear; gynoecium 3-3.4 cm long, ovary cylindrical, axile placentation. Fruit a capsule, 3.5-4.5 × 1.4 
cm; seeds ca. 1.7 cm long, funicle long, ca. 1 cm.    

Vriesea altobocainensis is a remarkable species from the Atlantic Forest of Serra da Bocaina. It is 
characterized by the robust habit, infundibuliform rosettes, inflorescences branches patent, with the 
apical portion of the branches ascending to slightly sigmoid [as documented in some species of 
Alcantarea (E. Morren ex Mez) Harms], red primary and floral bracts, and distichous flowers. 
Although this species is tipically an epiphyte, it can be found growing on the soil when falling from 
the forest canopy. 

According to Costa et al. (2015),  through the analysis of morphological characters, Vriesea sceptrum 
Mez and Vriesea altodaserrae L.B. Sm. belong to the same clade, along with basal lineages of Vriesea 
species. These species can be characterized by the compound inflorescences, with bracts longer than 
the peduncle of the branches, erect and linear to narrowly-oblong petals with apressed apices, and 
included stamens as detailed below. 

Vriesea altobocainensis is morphologically similar to V. sceptrum, a species from the highlands of 
Serra da Mantiqueira, in the States of São Paulo, Minas Gerais and Rio de Janeiro. Both present a 
robust habit, inflorescences with patent branches, dense and distichous flowers, short internodes (0.7-
1.5 cm long), and red primary bracts. Vriesea altobocainensis can be distinguished by a greater 
number of inflorescence branches (10-21) and flowers in the branches [(8-)10-20], orbicular to 
broadly-ovate upper primary bracts, 6-8 cm wide, red rachillas, orbicular to broadly-ovate floral 
bracts, 2-3 cm wide, obtuse at the apex, and yellow sepals. Vriesea sceptrum has a lower number of 
inflorescence branches (13-15) and flowers in the branches [5-9(-12)], triangular to ovate upper 
primary bracts, 2-5 cm wide, greenish-orange to orange rachillas, ovate floral bracts, 1.5-2.2 cm wide, 
acute to obtuse at the apex, and orange sepals (figure 3). 

Vriesea altobocainensis can also related to Vriesea altodaserrae, a species that inhabits the Serra do 
Mar mountain range, from sea level to the highest lands of Paraná, Santa Catarina and São Paulo, 
occuring also in Serra da Bocaina. Both species co-occur, with Vriesea altodaserrae being very 
common in the region. Vriesea altobocainensis is rarer, with the individuals inhabiting, in general, 
the forest canopy, which makes it of more difficult visualization, and therefore, harder to estimate 
population sizes. The two species share similar general morphology, especially in terms of the shape 
and size of the rosettes, the predominant red color of the primary bracts, and the distichous flowers 
with yellow sepals and petals. However, Vriesea altobocainensis presents more robust inflorescence 
branches, lower in number (10-21), thicker red rachillas, densely aggregated flowers, and internodes 
with 0.8-1.1 cm long. In addition, the primary bracts of the upper portion of the rachis are orbicular 
to broadly-ovate, 6-8 cm wide; floral bracts are red or, when at the apex of the branch, red and yellow 
at the apex, orbicular to broadly-ovate, 2-2.8 cm wide. Vriesea altodaserrae has more delicate 
inflorescence branches, more numerous (20-30), thinner green to greenish-yellow rachillas, and 
internodes 1.5-2 cm long. The primary bracts of the upper portion of the rachis are broadly-ovate, 3-
6 cm long; floral bracts are yellow, ovate, 1.4-2 cm wide (figure 3). 

Vriesea altobocainensis is restricted to the montains of Serra da Bocaina, in the Atlantic Rainforest, 
growing preferably as an epiphyte. The specific epithet we propose refers to the locality where the 
species occurs, the highlands of Serra da Bocaina.  

The authors thank Klei Sousa for the illustration, the two anonymous reviewers for their valuable 
comments, Biologist Marcio Leodegario and Mr. José Lopes for fieldwork assistance.  
