Data has become increasingly important and valuable for both scientists and health 
authorities searching for answers to the COVID-19 crisis. Due to difficulties in 
diagnosing this infection in populations around the world, initiatives supported by 
digital technologies are being developed by governments and private companies to 
enable the tracking of the public’s symptoms, contacts and movements. Considering the 
current scenario, initiatives designed to support infection surveillance and monitoring 
are essential and necessary. Nonetheless, ethical, legal and technical questions abound 
regarding the amount and types of personal data being collected, processed, shared and 
used in the name of public health, as well as the concomitant or posterior use of this 
data. These challenges demonstrate the need for new models of responsible and 
transparent data and technology governance in efforts to control SARS-COV2, as well 
as in future public health emergencies. 

The growing production and use of data, made possible by increasingly powerful and 
specialized digital technologies, has empowered the emergence of new forms of 
knowledge production through sophisticated computational modeling and algorithms. In 
this new context, data becomes ever more important and valuable in a variety of 
contexts, including social, political and economic interests1. 

During the COVID-19 pandemic, the introduction of a previously unidentified 
etiological agent and the peculiarities of its accompanying disease present challenges 
and pose risks to the lives and health of populations worldwide, necessitating an urgent 
response. As a result, personal data from diverse sources has been requisitioned, under 
the presumption of ethical and legal usage, to investigate scientific questions based on 
populational characteristics, as well as data from laboratories and hospitals, among 
others. 

A worldwide effort by scientists, organizations and health practitioners is being 
undertaken to close gaps in knowledge as quickly as possible to enable health 
authorities to introduce efficient clinical management and prevention measures to 
address the pandemic, including the agile implementation of improved diagnostic 
capacity and the rehabilitation of COVID-19 cases in a timely manner. These actions 
require articulation between governmental measures and different segments of society 
in order to maximize disease control efforts. 

The WHO has advised that each country, in accordance with respective risk 
assessments, be prepared to respond to possible scenarios and rapidly implement 
necessary measures to reduce viral transmission and minimize economic and social 
impacts2.  As a result, high quality data is needed to assess basic epidemiological 
patterns. Unfortunately, uncertainties surrounding COVID-19 also extend to the quality 
of data available to researchers, not only with respect to understanding underlying 
epidemiological patterns of disease, but also in the construction of mathematical models 
aimed at providing evidence to support decision making at diverse levels.  

Considering the enormous burden posed by diagnosing infection in the general 
population, technological initiatives have been developed to enable the tracking of 
citizens’ symptoms, contacts and movements, elements considered essential to the 
design of infection surveillance strategies by governments. Great hope lies in the 
development of applications that collect data on individuals, including their geolocation 
information and movements3. These practices raise questions regarding the type and 
amount of data required, and ethical, legal and technical challenges permeate related 
data collection, access, sharing and usage issues4,5. 

Apple and Google recently announced the joint development of a tool to track COVID-
19 infection in a partnership aimed at ensuring interoperability between iOS and 
Android operating systems. According to the companies, users can opt in at their 
discretion, but there has been no mention of an option to subsequently withdraw 
consent. The tool, according to published specifications6, bears similarities to other 
contact tracing solutions, broadly inspired by those already in operation in Singapore 
and proposals under development in Europe, such as DP-3T (Decentralized Privacy-
Preserving Proximity Tracing)7 or the PEPP-PT (Pan-European Privacy-Preserving 
Proximity Tracing)8 project and MIT Safe Paths Platform, which seek to maximize 
privacy9. 

These mobile system solutions, which can be broadly classified as contact tracing 
systems, generally function through the short-range exchange of anonymous identifiers 
via Bluetooth technology. Depending on the solution, an application made available by 
national health authorities can be installed, or the technology may eventually be “baked-
into” operating systems. Users who receive positive coronavirus test results register 
their status in the application, which then communicates this to respective health 
authorities; others with whom the user came into close contact during the previous 14 
days will also receive alerts10. As these are technologies still under development and 
undergoing maturation, differences in implementation could, over time, prove very 
significant; as an example, consider what appears to be the centralized focus of the 
PEPP-PT compared to the decentralized approach of DP-3T. 

The current panorama surrounding the Coronavirus epidemic indicates that, during the 
next phases in which society will continue adapting to living with the virus, the use of 
personal data and applications or devices will play a prominent role not only in gauging 
contact, but also for purposes such as verifying the compliance of isolation or 
quarantine measures, which may extend to probabilistic contagion verification or 
managing permissions for citizens to go out in public, among many other uses. 

It is important to remember that data collection through applications and smartphones 
requires access to these technologies and users must necessarily be familiar with their 
usage; this implies that the data collected will be representative of certain populational 
groups. Accordingly, adopted measures must consider health inequalities and 
accommodate differences in the impacts of solutions on diverse segments of 
populations. 

In addition to location tracking, encouraging users to self-report symptoms and 
automatically sending alerts about possible contact with infected individuals, personal 
data, such as patient health information, is being used in other ways. In the UK, for 
example, government agencies have been working with technology companies to build 
a COVID-19 repository containing patient data. These companies were hired by the 
National Health Service (NHS) to assist with the elaboration of predictive models using 
artificial intelligence and patient data. The initiative was justified by the need for 
information regarding the burden on health services in real time using hospitalization 
data and intensive care bed availability, as well as equipment and supply needs. 

The NHS has declared that the data in this repository is confidential, anonymized and 
stored in a government database, and that it will remain under its control and subject to 
severe restrictions under data protection legislation; nonetheless, the initiative has 
aroused the public’s mistrust regarding ethical, privacy and data protection aspects of 
these citizens’ private information11. 

Questions and challenges have been raised regarding the public’s trust in the 
institutions, whether governmental or private, responsible for processing personal data. 
This wariness and questioning does not aim to prevent the use of data in the response to 
the pandemic, but highlights the need to establish safeguards to ensure a balance 
between individual and collective interests as well as to increase societal confidence in 
the institutions processing data for public health purposes12,13. 

In Brazil, the General Data Protection Law (LGPD), which was approved and 
sanctioned in 2018, is scheduled to take effect in August 2020; however, this could 
change as bills currently under consideration by the Brazilian congress seek to delay 
adoption until 2021. LGPD represents a milestone in the regulation of personal data, 
since it applies to all personal data handling operations, including in the arena of digital 
media, whether by individuals or public and private companies. This law was devised to 
protect the fundamental rights of freedom and privacy14. 

Informed self-determination is undoubtedly a fundamental aspect to be taken into 
consideration regarding the use of personal data, together with guarantees of 
transparency, security and the minimization of data usage. However, in the case of 
emergency situations and others in the public interest, such as a public health crisis, the 
use of personal data is allowed in the absence of citizens’ consent, provided that 
safeguards are put in place, the data is used precisely to achieve specified purposes and 
the agencies authorized to process data are qualified in accordance with regulations 
established in the Brazilian General Data Protection Law and the General Data 
Protection Regulation adopted by the European Union15. Several elements of the LGPD 
are designed to enable the use of personal data in policymaking and systems formulated 
to combat COVID-19, which can be used as soon as the law goes into force16. 

Anonymization, which consists of applying technical measures to render the direct or 
indirect association of data with a given individual impossible, and pseudo-
anonymization, which generally removes and replaces identifiers with a unique key 
code, are examples of data protection strategies incorporated into law. With few 
exceptions, anonymized data is generally not considered personal data, while pseudo-
anonymized data is still considered personal data due to the potential for reidentification 
of individuals through a key code, potentially high levels of security. Due to the 
possibility of identifying anonymized data17, combinations of various procedures are 
necessary to preserve individual privacy, particularly when databases are integrated18. 

Compliance with general data protection laws, therefore, requires technology, 
infrastructure and specialized personnel to ensure that personal data are processed in a 
lawful, fair and responsible manner. Moreover, accountability must be guaranteed 
through the monitoring of data processing activities by designated authorities authorized 
to apply sanctions in the case of transgressions. In some countries, partnerships between 
government, universities and research institutes have created data centers to process and 
provide access to anonymized data in a secure and controlled manner to support 
investigative research in the public interest19. 

Anonymized or aggregated data are not considered personal data by data protection 
laws, since the identification of individuals is protected. However, even without 
referring to any specific individuals, groups could still be harmed due to the aggregation 
of information on locale, ethnicity, health situations and socioeconomic conditions, 
necessitating ethical scrutiny regarding the potential benefits generated by such 
evidence. 

Linnet Taylor has called attention to the fact that no protection exists against 
irresponsible technologies, as data protection laws focus exclusively on the protection 
of personal data, yet do not cover the freedoms and political rights of collective groups. 
Civil society groups must be allowed to participate in the governance of technologies. 
She argues that technology companies must be transparent and accountable to society in 
order to validate their legitimacy as actors on behalf of the government and population, 
at least those companies that, in light of the pandemic, have partnered with governments 
and now participate in the governance of citizens' data20. 

Considering that data can be used and shared by different people and organizations 
simultaneously, the main issues that need to be addressed pertain to responsible data 
governance based on transparency and citizen empowerment to fortify trust and 
establish balanced and fair relationships between individuals and organizations21. 

The legitimacy of collecting, processing, sharing and using personal data does not come 
from access to this data, but rather from trust in whomever possesses it, treats it with 
transparency and operates within legal parameters. From this perspective, the use of 
personal data to face COVID-19 and future public health emergencies must be guided 
by transparency, verification and accountability, beginning with collection and 
extending onwards to processing operations and the purported use of data, as well as by 
whom and for how long22. 

Clear and transparent terms and conditions must be applied regarding the access, 
sharing and use of the data collected in the name of public health, especially by private 
companies or through public-private partnerships. How and by whom will this data be 
accessed, processed and used? Will the data be stored, reused or discarded after the 
initial objectives are achieved? How will the data be protected? In the case of abuse or 
neglect, who will be held responsible? These and other questions should be asked and 
answered explicitly. 

Another regulatory aspect that deserves attention pertains to intellectual property rights, 
as the selection, organization or availability of data stored inside databases is protected 
by intellectual property rights23. Databases that can be integrated with data from other 
sources to subsidize the development of new technologies, including treatment and 
prevention technologies for COVID-19, will be subject to ownership rights and could 
potentially incur costs related to access. 

Partnerships between governments, technology companies and universities are 
necessary to enable the extraction of reliable knowledge from large volumes of data. 
The agreements covering these ventures must clearly specify the roles of the parties 
involved, as well as usage of the presumed and achieved results. The establishment of 
protocols with guiding principles providing for the agile and practical application of 
data processing in cases of collective interest, such as the current health emergency, is 
urgently needed, especially considering the national and transnational utilization of 
personal data collected by companies around the world. 

Responsible data governance also entails the description of data processing and analysis 
methodologies, as data can be provided as proof, as evidence, in decision making for 
both public policy and science24
. Importantly, any machine learning-based algorithm is 
representative of the pattern or regularity of what it was intended to measure. 
Algorithms are powerful and important resources that cannot be separated from causal 
explanations due to the risks of making decisions based only on automated results and 
predictions. The predominant role of the scientific method is thusly to validate and 
increase the reliability and usefulness of results. Indeed, science is preoccupied with the 
questioning of assumptions, values and biases in order to distinguish opinions from 
evidence.  

Regulations are the only mechanism capable of establishing limits on the processing of 
personal data by governments and private corporations, even in a health crisis, to avoid 
negative impacts resulting from temporary relaxation, which have the potential to 
become permanent, as was seen in the United States following the September 11th 
attacks in 2001. Public surveillance strategies were introduced using existing and 
emerging technologies at the time, justified by the monitoring of suspicious individuals 
and in order to avoid future terrorist aggression, resulting in lawful changes arising from 
fear instilled in society25. 

The adoption of more just, responsible and sustainable data governance models, 
designed to protect and defend ethical and regulatory principles, serves to increase the 
confidence of individuals and society in the use of personal data to respond to situations 
of legitimate public interest. Aspects related to the privacy rights, the protection of 
personal data and the rights of groups do not preclude the use of personal data, 
especially in response to a pandemic. The public health emergency provoked by SARS-
COV-2 highlights the pressing need for new forms of personal data governance that 
include civil society, with the goal of promoting equitable benefits for society as a 
whole.  
