Introduction: We evaluated the performance of the Holt’s model to forecast the daily COVID-19 reported cases in Brazil and three 
Brazilian states. 

Methods: We chose the date of the first COVID-19 case to April 25, 2020, as the training period, and April 26 to May 
3, 2020, as the test period. 

Results: The Holt’s model performed well in forecasting the cases in Brazil and in São Paulo and Minas 
Gerais states, but the forecasts were underestimated in Rio de Janeiro state. 

Conclusions: The Holt’s model can be an adequate short-
term forecasting method if their assumptions are adequately verified and validated by experts.

Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is caused by SARS-CoV-2 
(or 2019-nCOV), a pathogen that primarily targets the human 
respiratory system1. The most common symptoms at the onset of the 
illness are cough, fever, and fatigue2. The first cases were reported 
in December 2019 in Wuhan, Hubei Province, China, and rapidly 
spread throughout the country and then the world. In January 2020, 
the World Health Organization (WHO) declared that COVID-19 is 
a “public-health emergency of international concern”3. 

To contribute in addressing the challenge of predicting the 
spread of the disease and obtaining short-term predictions, different 
types of mathematical and statistical models can be used (see 4 
and 5 as examples). Accordingly, let us to consider an epidemic 
curve as a time series data of the daily number of cases of a 
disease, and let Yt be the cumulative number of confirmed cases on  
day t. It is expected that this curve initially grows exponentially, 
but at a given moment, it slows and approaches a limit. Therefore, 
the simple exponential model is commonly used to describe the 
initial phase of an outbreak6, and S-shaped models such as the 
logistic, Gompertz, log-normal, and Richards models are widely 
used to model all the reported cumulative cases of a disease7. In 
the present communication, we alternatively propose the use of 
double exponential smoothing for short-term forecasting of the daily 
COVID-19 cases in Brazil, before the peak of the cases.

Methods based on exponential smoothing are often used for 
forecasting. These methods are based on a moving average of past 
values only, so that the smoothed value at the present time is used as 
the forecast of the next value8. The Holt-Winters exponential model 
is a more general method for smoothing the data when trend and 
seasonality are present. The double exponential smoothing (also 
called the Holt's method) is a special case in which seasonality is 
absent. Finally, the single exponential smoothing is used when no 
trend or seasonal components are present. In the equation for the 
Holt’s method, the forecasted value of the series at time t is given by <> 
, where Lt is the estimated level given by <> 

Tt is the estimated slope given by <> 
, and α and β are the smoothing parameters (technical details can be 
found in 8). For applying the Holt's model, we used the holt function 
in the forecast library of the R language (version 3.6.2).

Data on daily COVID-19 cases were obtained from the 
Brazilian Health Ministry (available at https://covid.saude.gov.br/). 

Our analysis included data from the whole country and from the 
Brazilian states of São Paulo, Minas Gerais, and Rio de Janeiro. 
These are the three most populous Brazilian states, and together, 
have more than 80 million inhabitants (approximately 40% of the 
Brazilian population). We considered the daily reports from the date 
on which the first case was notified in Brazil and in each state up to 
April 25, 2020, as the training period. The values of the validation 
period were the correspondent observations from April 26 to May 
3, 2020. We compared the forecast accuracy of the Holt's method 
with those obtained by fitting the traditional logistic, Gompertz, 
log-normal, and Richards growth curves. These comparisons were 
based on the mean absolute percent error (MAPE), a measure based 
on the differences between the forecasted and the actual values. The 
Theil's U entropy coefficient was used as a measure of out-of-sample 
forecasting accuracy9. When this coefficient is higher than 1, the 
forecasts under consideration are less accurate than those offered 
via a naïve approach, i.e., a simple method in which the forecasts 
are equal to the last observed value.

Figure 1 shows the cumulative number of reports of COVID-19 
until April 25, 2020, in Brazil and in the states of São Paulo, Minas 
Gerais, and Rio de Janeiro, and the forecasted values from the 
Holt’s method with their correspondent prediction intervals. These 
values are detailed in Table 1, which also compares the actual and 
forecasted daily values from April 26 to May 3, 2020. The Theil's 
U coefficients are lower than 1 for the forecasts considering the 
data from Brazil and the states of São Paulo and Minas Gerais, 
but higher than 1 when the data from the state of Rio de Janeiro is 
considered (values are shown in Figure 1). In addition, as observed 
in Table 1, almost all the actual daily reports of COVID-19 ​belong 
to the correspondent 95% prediction intervals, except for the 
forecasts considering the data from the state of Rio de Janeiro. 
The estimated number of cases tends to underestimate the actual 
reports of COVID-19 from April 27, owing to a sudden increase 
in notifications that started on this date.

Considering the data from Brazil, the MAPE values for the 
forecasting methods based on the logistic, Gompertz, log-normal, 
and Richards curves are 17.09, 10.84, 9.05, and 10.84, respectively. 
These corresponding values are 21.81, 15.70, 14.37, and 15.70 
considering the data from the state of São Paulo; 14.63, 8.52, 5.13, 
and 8.52 considering the data from the state of Minas Gerais; and 
18.00, 10.54, 8.18, and 10.55 considering the data from the state 
of Rio de Janeiro. In all the situations, the MAPE values for the 
forecast based on the Holt’s method (shown in Figure 1) are smaller 
than those obtained from the fit of the traditional growth curves, 
showing a better performance of the Holt’s method compared to 
the others (even for the forecasts using data from the state of Rio de 
FIGURE 2: Comparison between the actual number of notified cases of COVID-19 and the forecasted values obtained from the Holt’s, logistic, Gompertz, log-normal, 
and Richards models, for the period from April 26 to May 3, 2020, considering (a) Brazil and the states of (b) São Paulo, (c) Minas Gerais, and (d) Rio de Janeiro.
Janeiro). Figure 2 provides a visual comparison between the actual 
daily reports of COVID-19 from April 26 to May 3, 2020, and the 
forecasts from the different methods. Exponential models were not 
used in this analysis, as they performed poorly in describing the 
epidemic curves based on the training period. 

In order to correctly interpret the results of these statistical 
models, we should keep in mind an important quote from Saffo10: 
“The goal of forecasting is not to predict the future but to tell you 
what you need to know to take meaningful action in the present”. 
In this sense, the out-of-sample predicted values should be seen 
primarily as the daily number of cases of COVID-19 that we would 
expect to find if the epidemic curve continues to grow with the 
same behavior observed during the training period. The volatility 
of the time series of reported cases is highly dependent on extrinsic 
factors (such as the availability of tests for essential screening) as 
well as in the speed of updating and the availability of results and 
changes in the mitigation measures11. In turn, these factors are 
affected by the incubation period of the virus of approximately 14 
days (interquartile range, 8–17 days), with variations according to 
the age of the patient and status of the patient's immune system12. 
Therefore, we can conclude that the Holt’s model showed good 
forecast performance for the data from Brazil and the states of 
São Paulo and Minas Gerais, probably because the behavior of 
the epidemic curves do not change significantly at the beginning 
of the validation period. This did not happen considering the data 
from the state of Rio de Janeiro. However, we do not believe that 
this is a defect of the method but rather a failure to comply with 
its assumptions. These observations apply to any mathematical 
or statistical model used for obtaining predictions of cases of 
COVID-19, and for that reason, every forecasting model should 
be accompanied by the expertise of trained individuals familiar 
with the dynamics of infectious diseases. In addition, we reinforce 
that the generalization of the results of this study is restricted to 
the objective of obtaining short-term forecasts for the cumulative 
number of cases of COVID-19 in a determined population, as the 
Holt’s model has a low sensitivity for predicting the peak of the 
outbreak or for providing long-term forecasts.

An important and obvious limitation of this study is that it was 
conducted only using the reported number of COVID-19 cases 
that have been officially notified. Considering the insufficient 
number of screening tests and the consequent low effectiveness in 
confirming cases of COVID-19 in Brazil, it is obviously expected 
that the actual number of cases of the disease is much greater than 
that presented here13,14. Nevertheless, while these data are biased, 
they are the only source of information available that can guide 
our efforts to understand the outbreak dynamics. Because of the 
urgency for information that can be useful for the decision-making 
processes during the course of an epidemic, we consider that these 
data are “that's what we have for today,” and that they can be 
properly used when their potential limits are well discussed. As 
an additional commentary, the models presented in this study only 
represent the cumulative number of cases of a disease, while other 
more complex models can provide more accurate predictions by 
also taking into account the number of susceptible and recovered 
individuals (called susceptible-infected-recovered [SIR] models 
and their extensions)7.

In conclusion, despite all the problems described herein that 
make the prediction of cases of COVID-19 a challenging task, 
the Holt’s model can be an adequate alternative to the traditional 
S-shaped curves if their assumptions are adequately verified and 
validated by experts.

This study was supported by the Conselho Nacional de 
Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq, process 
312161/2019-0).
