This article aims to analyse how formulations, politeness, and facework are employed by 
speakers to achieve specific purposes in courtroom interaction. The theoretical framework is 
based on the concepts of conversation analysis and forensic linguistics, and the corpus 
consists of the trial of Jodi Ann Arias, which received widespread media attention in the 
United States. The excerpts under analysis were taken from the final day of the prosecutor’s 
cross-examination and from a reporter’s transcript of proceedings, both available on the 
Internet. It is important to highlight that these devices contribute to construct, enhance, 
threaten, or weaken people’s image involved in this kind of context. 

As stated by Schegloff (2001, p. 230), conversational interaction can be thought of as a “form 
of social organization through which the work of the constitutive institutions of societies gets 
done − institutions such as the economy, the polity, the family, socialization, etc”, and it is 
“the basic and primordial environment for the development, the use, and the learning of 
natural language”. From this perspective, we have developed an interest in applying 
conversation analysis to interactions in forensic settings and the tools that speakers can 
employ to achieve specific goals and results. This research therefore consists of a textual-
interactive approach to the spoken language, which is based on the interface between the 
concepts of conversation analysis and forensic linguistics. Above all, we intend to analyse 
how formulations, politeness, and facework are employed by speakers in courtroom 
interactions to achieve specific goals. We have analysed some elements such as: adjacency 
pairs “question/answer”, so-prefaced questions, discourse markers, paraphrases, face 
threatening acts, mitigation devices, verbal planning markers, formulations prefaced by 
discourse markers, tag questions, and three central properties of formulations which are 
preservation, transformation, and deletion.  

Regarding legal interaction and conversation analysis, Stokoe and Edwards (2010, p. 155-
156) argue that “the various interactional contexts that comprise legal institutions (e.g., 
courtrooms, police stations, emergency services, prisons, legal documents, lawyers’ oﬃces) 
have provided materials” for ethnomethodology1 and conversation analysis since their 
beginnings. The authors postulate that “interaction in places such as courtrooms can constitute 
some of the most highly consequential moments in people’s lives”. 

On forensic linguistics, Caldas-Coulthard (2014, p.1) points out that it is a newly created 
academic subject which is very active in English-speaking countries, and The International 
Association of forensic linguists (IAFL), which was founded in 1993 in Britain, demonstrates 
the importance of this area. Bearing that in mind, this study specifically falls within the scope 
of interaction in legal contexts2 as in this field of study and analysis, “forensic experts focus 
on the spoken language of legal interactions (in courthouses, police stations, interviews, 
among other contexts” (Caldas-Coulthard, 2014, p. 3). 

A key concept in conversational analysis is the sequential unit termed adjacency pair. The 
basic idea is that the turns occur in pairs, and the first pair-part creates certain expectations 
that limit the possibilities for the second. According to Sacks et al., (1974, p. 716), “that class 
of units also includes such sequences as ‘greeting-greeting’, ‘invitation-acceptance/decline’ 
etc”. The first component that forms an adjacency pair can be called a “first pair-part”. In 
agreement with the authors, 

[...] they set constraints on what should be done in a next turn (e.g., a ‘question’ making ‘answer’ 
especially relevant for next turn), but do not by themselves allocate the/a next turn to some candidate 
next speaker. They are, nonetheless, the basic component for selecting next speaker, since it is primarily 
by affiliation a first pair-part that the apparently most effective device for selecting next speaker – 
addressing someone – in fact works. (Sacks et al., 1974, p. 717) 

The simple occurrence of a turn3 does not constitute a conversation; actually, we believe that 
not even two turns constitute a conversation either. There must be more than two coordinated 
and cooperative turns, which are involved in conditions of relevance (conditional relevance). 
Given the first part of the turn, a second is expectable, and if it occurs, it is regarded as a 
second in relation to the first. In these terms, the sequence of the first part coupled with the 
second constitutes a conversational pair, which is considered, in fact, the minimal dialogic 
unit.  

We also must consider that turns can be allocated. Unlike prototypical sequences “Question 1-
Answer 1-Question 2-Answer 2” (Q1-A1-Q2-A2), not all first pairs necessarily receive 
immediately their second pairs. These cases occur when a question-answer sequence is 
delayed while another question-answer sequence intervenes. According to Yule (1996, p. 77), 
“the sequence will then take the form of Q1-Q2-A2-A1, with the middle pair (Q2-A2) being 
called an insertion sequence”. In this structure, the pair Q2A2 is inserted into the pair Q1A1, 
so the embedded pair in the sequence is an insertion sequence. The author affirms that 
“although that appears to be a question (Q2) in response to a question (Q1), the assumption is 
that once the second part (A2) of the insertion sequence is provided, the second part (A1) of 
the initial question (Q1) will follow”. As Coulthard and Brazil (1992, p. 52) observe: 

In other words, during the inserted sequence the original question retains its transition relevance, and if 
the second speaker does not then produce an answer it is noticeably absent in exactly the same way as it 
would be if there were no intervening sequence, and the questioner can complain about the lack of an 
answer in exactly the same way. Thus the argument is that adjacency pairs are normative structures, the 
second part ought to occur, and for this reason the other sequences can be regarded as being inserted 
between the first pair part that has occurred and the second pair part that is anticipated. 

Because the first question is immediately followed by another question, instead of the direct 
answer, it appears that the interlocutor wants to gain more time to delay the answer. We 
illustrate these cases as following: 

Q1: Do you want the early flight? 

Q2: What time does it arrive? 

A2: Nine forty-five. 

A1: Yeah – that’s great. (Yule, 1996, p. 78) 

In the example above, the delay in the answer indicates that the first part of the pair does not 
necessarily receive the second part that the speaker expects. Yule (1996, p. 78) observes that 
“delay in response symbolically marks potential unavailability of the immediate (i.e., 
normally automatic) expected answer. Delay represents distance between what is expected 
and what is provided. Delay is always interpreted as meaningful”.    

Adjacency pairs are the basis for the following principle: every move in a conversation is 
essentially a response to a previous one and an anticipation of what is to come. When 
speakers formulate their contributions, they often show their understanding of the previous 
speech and reveal their expectations about the next one. In line with Goffman (1981, p. 5): 

Whenever people talk there are very likely to be questions and answers. These utterances are realized at 
different points in "sequence time." Notwithstanding the content of their questions, questioners are 
oriented to what lies just ahead, and depend on what is to come; answerers are oriented to what has just 
been said, and look backward, not forward. Observe that although a question anticipates an answer, is 
designed to receive it, seems dependent on doing so, an answer seems even more dependent, making 
less sense alone than does the utterance that called it forth. Whatever answers do, they must do this with 
something already begun. 

As the scholar points out: “in questions and answers we have one example, perhaps the 
canonical one, of what Harvey Sacks has called a ‘first pair part’ and a ‘second pair part’, that 
is, a couplet, a minimal dialogic unit”. It is a round two utterances long, each one of the same 
type and temporally following directly on the other; in sum, an example of an “adjacency 
pair”. The first pair-part sets up a “conditional relevance”, on anything that occurs in the slot 
which follows. “Whatever comes to be said there will be inspected to see how it might serve 
as an answer, and if nothing is said, then the resulting silence will be taken as notable--a 
rejoinder in its own right, a silence to be heard” (Goffman, 1981, p. 6). Wooffitt (2005, p. 32) 
claims that 

an adjacency pair is a sequence of two utterances which are adjacent, produced by different speakers, 
ordered as a first part and second part and typed, so that a first part requires a particular second, or 
range of second parts (Heritage, 1984a, p. 246). An invitation, then, would be the first part of an 
invitation –response pair, a question the first part of a question – answer pair, and a greeting the first 
part of a greeting–greeting pair.   

Even though two-part adjacency pairs are very common, there is a lot of casual conversation 
that this set of categories does not cover, for instance: classroom discourse, interrogations, 
service encounters and many other kinds of everyday talk which have a third move in their 
exchanges4. These types of conversational routines offer “an opportunity for participants to 
check that they are agreed on the function of the previous pair, to comment on the exchange 
as it stands, to react to the response in the context of the initiation” (Sinclair, 1992, p. 85): 

I Why? Did you wake up late today?5 

R Yeah, pretty late.  

F Oh dear. 

Despite recognizing that a two-part structure, particularly the adjacency pair 
“question/answer”, is very frequent in conversation, a potential three-part structure also 
occurs. The Birmingham Discourse Analysis model suggests a potential three-part structure 
rather than a two-part one. Coulthard and Brazil (1992, p. 66) argue that “all eliciting 
exchanges have the potential of a three-part structure, while accepting that a two-part 
realization may, and in the case of polar responses often does, occur”. As observed in the 
general practitioner consultation below, “three-part exchanges are in fact by no means 
uncommon”: 

Doctor, I: And what’s been the matter recently  

Patient, R: Well I’ve had pains around the heart  

Doctor, I: Pains—in your chest then  

Patient, R: Yes  

Doctor, I: Whereabouts in your chest  

Patient, R: On the—heart side, here  

Doctor, F: Yes  

Doctor, I: And how long have you had these for  

Patient, R: Well I had ’em a—week last Wednesday  

Doctor, F: A week last Wednesday  

The discussion does not rely on the quantity of talk is made up of two-part structure or three-
part structure. In accordance with Sinclair (1992, p. 85), “the problem is not going to be 
resolved by a majority vote-by counting up whether the greater quantity of talk is two-part or 
three-part in its exchange structure. We must seek an explanation of the variability of the 
exchange”. 

The term formulation was first introduced by Garfinkel and Sacks (1970) as practices that 
interactants might use to show that they understand parts of interaction. These parts can be 
taken by them as opportunities to formulate the conversation, that is, to describe the 
conversation, “to explain it, or characterize it, or explicate, or translate, or summarize, or 
furnish the gist of it, or take note of its accordance with rules, or remark on its departure from 
rules” (Garfinkel & Sacks, 1970, p. 350). A very good example of this is “Pains—in your 
chest then” in:  

Doctor, I: And what’s been the matter recently  

Patient, R: Well I’ve had pains around the heart  

Doctor, I: Pains—in your chest then 

Patient, R: Yes (Coulthard and Brazil 1992, p. 66)   

As Heritage and Watson (1979, p. 128-129) explain, “the uses of formulations are multiplex 
[…] they may be used to address an immense variety of matters, these matters being, in their 
most specific terms, heavily embedded in the specific stretches of talk in which they occur”. 

According to them, formulations manifest three essential properties: “preservation, deletion 
and transformation” of a prior utterance or utterances.  

Based on these properties described by the above-mentioned authors, Holt and Johnson (2010, 
p. 28) highlight:     

(1) the preservation of some (selected) aspects of the sense and reference of the news materials 
delivered in the content of the formulating utterance (2) the transformation of the syntactic and semantic 
framework within which the news was originally delivered (3) the deletion of some aspect or aspects of 
the news delivered. Heritage and Watson (1977, p. 2-3)   

Deppermann (2011, p. 122) argues that “same-speaker formulations, which rework a prior 
version of reference or description, are used to explicate, clarify, specify, generalize, etc. 
meanings; other-speaker formulations are displays of understanding (and can clarify, 
explicate, etc. as well)”. Nevertheless, in neither case formulations are a transparent device for 
making meanings clear. “Formulations have both an explicative and a transformative aspect”:  

While each formulation preserves parts of the meaning established before, it deletes other parts and 
adds new aspects of meaning (Heritage and Watson, 1979, p. 129). In addition, there is a reﬂexive 
relationship between ﬁrst and second versions: Formulations make meanings explicit which were 
implicit in the prior version (or which are at least treated as if they had been implicated in it), but their 
local meaning rests itself in part on the versions they are meant to replace. When studying semantic 
properties of formulations, it is important to attend both to the sequential organization and the precise 
linguistic design of the formulation. Deppermann (2011, p. 122) 

Drew (2003, p. 296) asserts that formulations “serve to perform specific interactional tasks 
which vary according to the setting”. They are a generic mechanism in the interaction, 
however, the ways through which they are presented are related to the activities they manage 
in specific situations. These devices are therefore multifunctional as they play many different 
interactional roles in many different contexts.     

According to Goffman (1974, p. 9), “the term face is the positive social value a person 
effectively claims for himself by the line others assume he has taken during a particular 
contact”. Politeness is a social phenomenon which aims at maintaining harmony in interaction 
to establish cordiality in relationships among participants. Schneider (1998, p. 51) states that 
politeness is usually expressed in grammatical structures by means of “pragmatic conventions 
recognized by a given society as having some intentional illocutionary force (e.g., please..., 
could you... etc.)”.  

Goffman (1974, p. 9) postulates that “face is an image of self, delineated in terms of approved 
social attributes, therefore, it is an image that others may share, for example, when a person 
makes a good showing for his/her profession or religion by making a good showing for 
himself/herself”. In the process of interaction, speakers usually tend to construct a positive 
image of themselves and their place in society by adopting two possible attitudes: a defensive 
attitude, in which they need to preserve their own face, and a protective attitude, in which 
they must preserve their interlocutor’s face (Burgo & Neto, 2016, p. 885). 

Every person lives in a world of social encounters that involves contacts with others. In each 
of these contacts, people tend to externalize their opinions, judgments and points of view that 
lead them to act out what is called a line, that is, “a pattern of verbal and nonverbal acts by 
which he expresses his view of the situation and through this his evaluation of the 
participants, especially himself” (Goffman, 1974, p. 9). The individual hence expresses an 
evaluation of participants and, above all, of himself, so that his line presents a view of self. In 
addition, this line has to be in accordance with the way he wants to be seen. 

Regardless of whether an individual intends to take a line, he will think that he has effectively 
done so (cf. Goffman, 1974). “The other participants will assume that he has more or less 
wilfully taken a stand, so that if he is to deal with their response to him, he must take into 
consideration the impression they have possibly formed of him” (Goffman, 1974, p. 9). 

An individual protects face when his line is consistent with that expected by the other 
participants; in other words, when he shows an image which is based on interactants’ 
assumptions and judgments, approved by the line adopted by the speaker. Face is not housed 
within or on the surface of its owner, but it is widespread in the flow of events of the 
encounters, and it occurs when participants are willing to decode the judgments expressed in 
these events.  

Facework is defined by the author as everything a person does so that his actions do not make 
anyone lose face, including his own. Unlike politeness, facework is composed of practices 
that aim to establish, enhance, threaten or weaken the interlocutor’s image. Politeness, 
however, concerns behaviours related to people’s need to be approved and to ensure their 
autonomy. Originally based on the notion of face formulated by Goffman (1974), Brown and 
Levinson (1987) expanded the concept of politeness, pointing out two aspects of the socially 
constructed self-image: negative face and positive face. 

a) Negative face: “the want of every ‘competent adult member’ that his actions be unimpeded by 
others”; 

b) Positive face: “the want of every member that his wants be desirable to at least some others” (Brown 
& Levinson, 1987, p. 62). 

During a social encounter, every speaker intends to maintain face so the interaction develops 
without big problems; the individual focuses both on preserving his/her own face and on 
respecting the other’s. To preserve negative face, it is important to protect the private 
territory, intimacy. On the other hand, to preserve positive face, interlocutors need to be 
recognized and valued by others. This may cause a conflict, since their intention to preserve 
negative face, for example, can come up against the intention of others to preserve positive 
face. As argued by Belchí (1994, p. 332): 

[...] the defence of individual A’s own territory comes into conflict with individual’s B desire of starting 
relationships. Based on this principle, it is easy to come to a conclusion that any interaction is 
essentially confrontational, even though, fortunately, it does not occur in the same degree (our 
translation)6. 

Interaction essentially establishes conflictual situations, so the indispensable condition for its 
harmonious development is that the participants, according to Belchí (1994, p. 343), “preserve 
interlocutor’s face in order to maintain a balance between the desire to approach and the 
respect of other’s intimacy” (our translation)7.  

Although sometimes it is not possible to avoid face-threatening acts, certain strategies can be 
used to minimize potential threats (Cruz, 2020, p. 42). In some of Rosulek’s studies (2010, p. 
227), “lawyers use the voice of the law or judge to mitigate their potentially face-threatening 
acts. [...] the lawyer uses the authority of the judge to tell the jurors that they cannot use the 
defendant’s prior bad acts as evidence in this case”. In the example: “As the Court has 
instructed you, you should not simply conclude the defendant’s a bad person and therefore 
should be convicted of this”, the author states that “the judge has more authority to make 
requests and demands of the jurors”. If the lawyer had made a bald-faced demand or accused 
the jurors, he “might have damaged his relationship with them. Thus, the lawyer uses the 
authority of the judge to instruct them, instead of using his own voice”. Tkacuková (2010, p. 
343) mentions an example that involves politeness strategies during a cross-examination. 
According to her analysis: 

Several researchers (e.g., Cashion, 1985; Harris, 2003) have focused on the connection between 
politeness and power and have come to the same conclusion. Surprisingly, those participants who hold 
the most powerful roles tend to use politeness strategies abundantly to redress the face-threatening acts 
that they have to perform. But these participants can also choose not to use politeness strategies in case 
they need to explicitly show their power. According to Harris (2003, p. 33), it is negative politeness 
features that are especially relevant to institutional settings (i.e., those strategies that prevent imposing 
on the speaker or impeding them). The counsels in Cashion’s study (1985, p. 13) were found to exhibit 
mostly negative politeness features whereas positive politeness strategies (strategies that attend to the 
speaker’s needs to be liked) occurred only rarely. In his cross-examination, Rampton employs a 
negative politeness strategy ‘correct me if I’m wrong’ to avoid imposing his knowledge on the witness. 

Politeness ensures the protection of both speaker and listener’s face, whether performed by 
positive or by negative politeness strategies. 

The corpus of this research consists of Jodi Ann Arias’s trial, which gained massive attention 
from the media. On May 8, 2013, she was convicted of first-degree murder of her ex-
boyfriend Travis Victor Alexander in the United States. On June 4, 2008, Alexander was shot 
in the head, repeatedly stabbed, and had his throat cut. His body was discovered by friends in 
the shower of his home about five days later. They called 911 and when questioned by the 
police, they said Arias should be interrogated. On July 9, 2008, Arias was indicted on first-
degree murder charges in Alexander’s death. She was arrested on July 15, 2008, and 
sentenced to natural life in prison (with no possibility of parole) on April 13, 2015 in the State 
of Arizona. She is imprisoned at Arizona State Prison Complex – Perryville, Lumley Unit.  

To select the corpus, we have gathered all the material available on the Internet regarding 
Arias’s trial: we have watched all the videos of her trial available on YouTube, as well as the 
transcripts released to the media on the Internet. It is important to stress that according to the 
multi-platform news and information media company USA TODAY, during Arias’s 
sentencing retrial, she testified without the presence of the media, and the Court of Appeals 
ordered her testimony transcripts to be released8.  

This work follows an empirical-inductive approach, as the texts were obtained from concrete 
situations of usage and the analysis was carried out by examining all the occurrences for our 
qualitative interpretations. The data are presented in a format to illustrate how the language 
was spoken in real-life interactions which exhibited marks of local verbal planning (verbal 
planning and speaking occurred at the same time). By studying the cases, we have considered 
possible meanings and interpretations that led us to the theoretical framework employed in 
this research. With the aim of delimiting our corpus, we have chosen the types of 
formulations, politeness, and facework that could provide more interesting and noteworthy 
elements for analysis, that is, devices that were commonly used by speakers to achieve their 
purposes. Therefore, we have established the recurrence of those devices as a criterion for 
data selection. Based on that, we proceeded to the organization of the excerpts, which 
followed the chronological order of the events: the video containing the final day of the 
prosecutor’s cross-examination (Day 25) in Maricopa County Superior Court in Phoenix, 
Arizona, on February 21, 20139 and a reporter’s transcript of proceedings (testimony of Jodi 
Ann Arias) on November 3, 201410. We highlight that the excerpts taken from the video were 
transcribed according to Leite (2017, p. 21-22). 

Our analysis was organized into eight excerpts that showed significant elements for 
discussion such as: the adjacency pair “question/answer”, discourse markers, so-prefaced 
questions, paraphrases, positive politeness, solidarity politeness, negative politeness, 
deference politeness, properties of formulations (preservation, transformation, and deletion), 
tag questions, facework strategies, verbal planning markers, mitigation devices, and hedges.  

In the excerpts, the sentences that will be analysed are given in italics. The first three excerpts 
were taken from the final day of Jodi Ann Arias’s cross-examination (Day 25): Juan Martinez 
was the deputy county attorney, Kirk Nurmi and Jennifer Willmott worked for the defendant, 
and Sherry K. Stephens was the judge. The remaining excerpts were obtained from the 
reporter’s transcript of proceedings.  

We observe that the first pair-part of the “question/answer” adjacency pair is prefaced by the 
discourse marker so. It is relevant to note that discourse markers, in this work, are seen as 
syntactically independent elements from verbs that can be formed by one or more lexical 
items or expressions. They corroborate the monitoring of conversation as well as the 
organization of spoken text. In addition, they are also multifunctional mechanisms because 
they can operate as textual organizers and/or articulators, illocutionary force indicating 
devices, verbal planners and mitigators, among other functions. Schiffrin (2001, p. 57) 
postulates that “discourse markers could be considered as a set of linguistic expressions 
comprised of members of word classes as varied as conjunctions (e.g., and, but, or), 
interjections (oh), adverbs (now, then), and lexicalized phrases (y’know, I mean)”. 
Semantically, discourse markers exhibit “semantic aptness,” or appropriateness for the type of 
discourse marker that they become; more importantly, their semantic development provides 
evidence for unidirectionality, for referential (propositional) meaning being the source for 
pragmatic (textual and interpersonal) meanings (Brinton, 2001, p. 149). In the example above, 
the discourse marker so is used as topic developer. It occurs at the beginning of the turn and 
appears in a direct question which contributes to encourage the interlocutor to confirm the 
speaker’s inference.    

After reading the defendant’s statements under direct examination, Mr. Martinez asks her to 
confirm his comprehension about what really had happened. Although in everyday 
conversation, questions and answers are widely used by participants, the typical adjacency 
pair “question/answer” can vary in forensic contexts. Gibbons (2008, p. 119) states that “in 
courtroom examination however the atypical social relations mean that the underlying 
assumption, subject to certain exceptions, is that the lawyers and the judge ask the questions, 
and the witness replies”. In these settings, “witnesses are usually not permitted to reply off 
topic or to refuse to reply (unless a reply would be self-incriminating)”. We have to take for 
granted that many cross-examining lawyers do not ask questions to which they do not know 
the answer.  

At a first glance, we might think that he seeks to summarize the events in order to check if he 
understood them well (“So... after two o’CLOCK... that... you... took everything and put it 
down in the car correct?”). However, by asking her to answer if this information was correct, 
he asks her to make the decision to confirm it, and uses the interactional discourse marker  
correct, which suggests that it is not a mere attempt to understand what she said as this type 
of marker has the same function as a tag question. These markers are employed to seek 
discursive approval in argumentative and interactional contexts. It appears as an exposure of 
information that the lawyer built upon his own interpretation rather than a confirmation-
seeking request since this strategy is obviously the best for him to base a subsequent question 
on. By means of using so and correct in the same question, he tries to lead her to confirm that 
what he was saying was an acceptable version of the truth, leading the audience to assume 
that his interpretation is valid by obtaining confirmation of a version of events that he had in 
mind. Besides, as it was already mentioned, he uses a so-prefaced question which plays, 
according to Holt and Johnson (2010, p. 26), an important role “in evaluatory summary and 
are eﬀective in challenging and transforming the interviewee’s account, to such an extent that 
they may be forced to reformulate it in a way that is evidentially more significant”. Holt and 
Johnson (2010, p. 25) stress that  

researchers exploring legal talk (and other institutional environments such as news interviews) have 
noticed patterns in the design of questions that are associated with particular actions in these 
environments: and- and so-prefaced questions (Johnson, 2002), formulations (Heritage & Watson, 
1979; Heritage, 1985) and reported speech (Philips, 1986; Matoesian, 2000; Galatolo, 2007). These 
devices, recurrently employed in questions (and sometimes in other parts of trial discourse such as the 
use of reported speech in summing up), are often central to one of the main aims of legal discourse: to 
establish the culpability of one or more parties involved. 

The discourse marker correct contributes to make the interviewee agree with the interviewer’s 
version of events, as the authors argue: “the attorney’s questions are designed to elicit 
‘yes’/’no’ conﬁrmatory answers” (Holt & Johnson, 2010, p. 34). In this case, Arias does not 
offer an explicit affirmative answer, as expected by Martinez (“Yes, that is correct”), but she 
does not entirely exclude his version either. When she says, “that makes sense”, the 
interviewer achieves his aim since she does not disconfirm his interpretation.  

When Martinez says “pardon?”, it does not seem to be just a hearing problem (because she 
said in a very clear and loud voice), but a persuasive strategy as he might intend that the 
witness repeats what she has just explained to make her to say something that could be used 
as incriminating evidence. Then she reformulates her utterance by changing having sex into 
otherwise engaged, which is more polite and could also be more acceptable to listeners. This 
device helps her construct a positive image as it would be convenient to show the audience 
(particularly the jury) her civilized and ladylike side. By means of this paraphrase, she repairs 
what might be seen as a negative point and highlights what she desires to be displayed: to be 
recognized as a respectful person. It is what Scollon and Scollon (1983) denominate 
“deference politeness” inasmuch as she chose a more polite and respectful expression than the 
one she had used previously.  

We point out that, in this research, the words “positive” and “negative” do not mean “good” 
or “bad”; they are just used to indicate two opposite poles. In other words, positive politeness 
is related to the interlocutor’s desire to belong to a group, being thought of as a member of it, 
whereas negative politeness concerns the interlocutor’s respect, distance, and deference. In 
this vein, Scollon and Scollon (1983) call positive politeness “solidarity politeness” and 
negative politeness “deference politeness”. Bazergan (2017, p. 40) postulates that “lying 
behind solidarity politeness is the assumption that there is little distance (-D)11 between the 
participants and that there is also at most a slight power (-P) difference between them”. 
Concerning deference politeness, “participants are considered to be equals or near equals but 
treat each other at a distance” (Scollon & Scollon, 1995, p. 44). Therefore, deference 
politeness draws attention to the participants’ distance and solidarity politeness is more 
focused on the common grounds of the participants’ relations.  

Martinez threatens Arias’s negative face by trying to invalidate her version about the time the 
events had happened and showing how imprecise her statements are. Through the 
formulations “the way you’re saying is... you’re saying it could be... six o’clock in the evening 
and you’re telling us it was... surely after after two o‘clock”, he shows that she does not give 
any specific information, and it can be interpreted in many ways (six o’clock in the evening, 
for example) because of her unclear answers. He attempts to show her contradiction by using 
her own statement, reinforced by the discourse marker right (based on that statement right?), 
aiming at confirmation.  

According to Coulthard and Johnson (2007, p. 29), “in real courtrooms, when questioning 
witnesses, many of the lawyer’s turns are ‘face threatening acts’, which challenge the 
witness”. In agreement with the authors, “the lawyer’s role in the courtroom (particularly in 
cross-examination) allows him to interfere with and put pressure on the witness in pursuance 
of the interactional goals of the Crown or State, by whom he is given his power”.   

This device makes her version weaker because of the inconsistent way she describes the time 
of actions. She says that it was after two o’clock when she was putting the luggage in the car, 
and when Martinez asks her again: “And it was surely after two you... did what you were 
doing?”, she is totally vague. We can observe her hesitation by the use of the verbal planning 
markers Uh and well, accompanied by pauses and discourse markers which show uncertainty: 
maybe maybe not, I guess, and I don’t know. On the other hand, it is interesting to see that the 
prosecutor’s wording is vague as well: is “did what you were doing” having sex or putting the 
luggage in the car?. When questions are not clear, answers also tend to be unclear, and 
consequently this can make listeners confused because of the impreciseness of the utterances.        

We highlight the use of the formulation prefaced by the discourse markers and and so in “And 
so... when you’re saying you’re not sure”. Martinez prefaces his formulation with a 
conclusion: “and so you’re saying”, but he also preserves the sense of what Arias said, 
according to what he understood, basically repeating that she is not sure. Then he confronts 
her answer by asking her “you were a little bit more sure under direct examination weren’t 
you?”. This formulation deletes the part of her utterance that she is not sure, transforming it 
into other information which provides another way to interpret that: if she was a little bit more 
sure before, why is she not sure now? So, he keeps on asking her to get precise information 
that could be useful for his arguments, as we can see through the segment “But you were 
more... sure about the time... do you remember back to you?”.  

By drawing attention to the use of tag questions, Gibbons (2008, p. 121) points out that 
“perhaps the most widely discussed type of courtroom question is the tag question”. In 
agreement with him:  

The first part of such a question takes the form of a statement, in which the lawyer can include his/her 
version of events (the information). The second part consists of a tag, which exerts various forms of 
interactive pressure upon the witness (the social). This form of courtroom question is therefore a 
paradigm example of linguistic form matching pragmatic function, and in consequence it is not 
surprising that many questions in cross examination take the form of tags, and that there are many types 
of tags – some of them unusual in everyday discourse. 

In Excerpt 3, when Mr. Martinez says, “you were a little bit more sure under direct 
examination weren’t you?”, he enhances the notable contrast between Arias’s previous 
statement and now: she was sure before, but now she is not sure about the exact time she had 
put her items in the car. Knowing the time when she did that is extremely important to the 
construction of his accusation, we observe therefore a degree of coerciveness in his 
questioning. In general, most closed questions such as yes/no questions are more coercive 
because they oﬀer a limited possible set of answers. Although tag questions invite the 
interlocutors to say yes or no, they are more persuasive since they can make them (the 
interlocutors) feel more vulnerable because of the preceding utterance. Tkacuková (2005, p. 
335) asserts that:  

In comparison to yes/no questions, tag questions and declarative questions are strongly biased towards a 
conﬁrmative answer and so they are more coercive (Huddleston & Pullum 2002, p. 881-894). Apart 
from coercing witnesses into type-conforming replies, these types of questions oﬀer one more obvious 
advantage to counsels: they are perceived as statements and as such help to change the questions into 
evidence (Hobbs, 2003b, p. 486–87). Tag questions and declarative questions thus become a powerful 
tool which enables counsels to give evidence on behalf of witnesses and reduce witnesses to the role of 
minimal responders. But it is tag questions that are considered by some scholars (Woodbury, 1984, p. 
205; Berk-Seligson, 1999, p. 36) to be the most coercive type of questions as they have an additional 
pragmatic meaning: they imply that the person knows that the questioner is right. Gibbons (2003, p. 
101), however, warns of relying heavily on the form of questions since intonation, or tone of voice, is 
equally important for deﬁning the degree of coerciveness. 

Pragmatically speaking, like tag questions, we consider questions that end with the discourse 
markers correct and right as devices which have the same illocutionary force. Other examples 
that illustrate this are found in Excerpts 1 and 2, respectively, when Mr. Martinez says “So... 
after two o’CLOCK... that... you... took everything and put it down in the car correct?” and “it 
was at two specifically it was around two o’clock when you actually put the luggage in the 
car right?”. Relying on Gibbons (2003, p. 95), Holt and Johnson (2010, p. 25) show two 
objectives that questions can have in legal settings: “1. eliciting information and 2. obtaining 
conﬁrmation of a version of events that the questioner has in mind”. Our examples under 
analysis seem to constitute devices with the latter objective.   

The following excerpts were obtained from the reporter’s transcript of proceedings. It is 
important to highlight that “Q” represents the questioner (Ms. Willmott), and “A” stands for 
Arias. 

In Excerpt 4, through the formulation tell us what happened generally about what happened 
at the executive director banquet, we see that there is a transformation of the semantic 
framework because the original question tell us what happened at this executive director 
banquet? does not imply an answer in general terms. Ms. Willmott then reformulates her 
question in her line of argumentation including this new information which had not been 
asked before, considering that it was assumed by interlocutors. It is important to stress that 
this is just one small example of how courtroom questioning has different rules. In ordinary 
conversation, Arias’ reply would have been totally unremarkable. As Roca-Cuberes (2014, p. 
310-313) points out, institutional talk can be analysed in different settings:  

It has been observed that the participants in formal settings such as courtrooms, 
classrooms, news interviews, etc., tend to methodically organize their conduct so as to 
exhibit and produce the ‘institutional’ quality of their encounter (Drew and Heritage, 1992, 
p. 26). Furthermore, their conduct is constrained by a diminution of the array of options 
and possibilities for action that usually take place in ordinary conversation. […] In 
comparing the use of formulations in institutional settings and ordinary conversation, Paul 
Drew notes that formulations are rarely found in ordinary conversation (Drew, 2003). 
According to Drew, this is so because “we do not need to arrive at compromises after long 
negotiations in mundane conversation” (Drew, 2003, p. 306). 

Using the expression I don’t believe it’s non-responsive, Ms Willmott tries to explain why 
Arias had to describe and give some background information to answer her question. Markers 
such as  I think, I believe, and I assume, for example, are classified as opinion markers, 
commonly used with the first person singular. Although the epistemic value of opinion verbs 
usually expresses certainty and conviction, they sometimes may denote uncertainty or 
inaccuracy. In this case, the opinion marker is used as a facework device since it contributes 
to limit or neutralize possible contrary reactions or harmful interpretations from interlocutors. 
So, we observe an intention to guide listeners (mainly the Judge) on how to interpret the 
speech. It is a modalization marker as it mitigates the illocutionary force of the utterance. 
When using I don’t believe, we can protect our positive face by preserving our opinion from 
those who may not have the same opinion.  

In the example above, there are two markers well which are used to help speakers gain some 
time to elaborate their speeches. We also observe the marker you know employed for purposes 
of social interaction. These devices are widely used in spoken language and are responsible 
for the development of the conversational turn. By means of the marker you know, speakers 
seek interlocutors’ anticipatory discursive approval in order to prevent themselves from the 
possibility of possible disagreements. It implicitly induces the listener to identify with the 
speaker’s speech or dissuade those who have a different opinion. It is a measure taken by the 
speaker to prevent something unpleasant or inconvenient from happening. 

Combined with the time planner marker well, the Judge uses the hedge technically in “Well, 
technically”, which is a mitigation sign. It is an element that functions as a hedge as it 
promotes the deletion of marks of enunciation to minimize potential risks to the speakers’ 
face. It softens the danger embedded in the speaker’s statement and guides the listener to a 
convenient interpretation of their statements.  

The term “hedge” adopted in this research was coined by Brown and Levinson (1987, p. 145): 
“the particle, word or phrase that modifies the degree of membership of a predicate or noun 
phrase in the set; it says of membership that it is partial, or true only in certain respects, or 
that it is more true and complete than might be expected”. In addition, we can see another 
mitigation device why don’t you restate in “why don’t you just restate the question that you 
technically asked her”. It reduces the force of an imperative verb such as restate and makes 
the request more polite, protecting therefore the speaker’s positive face. 

Regarding the use of I think  and I don’t think  in Excerpt 5, we highlight that they have the 
same functions already observed in Excerpt 4. This is a mitigation device as it helps the 
speaker reduce their responsibility for upon what they say. The role of this kind of marker is 
to mitigate, to protect the speaker’s face as it reflects, in a subtle way, an opinion semantically 
full of ideological values and different goals in the interaction. Markers such as I think (that),  
I believe (that),  I know, and it seems to me, for example, apart from presenting an opinion, 
have a mitigation value because they not only reveal the presence of the interlocutor, but also 
contribute to reduce the speakers’ responsibility for the opinion they state. When the Judge 
says “so the question frames her answers, I think that it’s appropriate”, for instance, she 
points out the reason for sustaining the objection. Since the question is very objective “what 
do you do”, not “who was there”, the defendant has to answer it in a very objective way as 
well otherwise it could be objected to. Even though it is clear that the interrogative pronoun 
what used in the question does not accept other answers, she uses the opinion marker I think 
to affirm that the objection is appropriate. It is a strategy that contributes to soften her 
responsibility on what she says and, at the same time, to preserve her positive face as her 
attitude may be seem by listeners as a quite fair judgement.        

Another element from informal conversation is the marker I mean. In the case above, this 
device is employed by the speaker to guide the listener to a desired interpretation. This 
metalanguage form of modalization approaches the discourse practice and the representation 
of speech. The speaker draws attention to the way things are being said, directing or 
redirecting the listener to a particular intended meaning. Through I mean, speakers try to lead 
the listener's attention to something that is more convenient for them. Regarding the markers 
well and you know, we point out the same functions mentioned in Excerpt 4, as well as the 
hedge technically.  

Concerning formulations, we observe three properties: preservation, transformation, and 
deletion. The original question is “After leaving that convention, did you have any type of 
impressions about -- that you learned from convention?”, later reformulated by “Did you have 
other impressions having to do with your life and where your life was going?”. The aspect 
related to her impressions is preserved, but the interpretation changes when some aspects of 
the news delivered are deleted (impressions related to what she had learned from that 
convention) and later transformed (other impressions that had to do with her life and where 
her life was going). The question is semantically transformed since the defendant is not being 
asked if she has any type of impressions, but if she has other impressions, restricting them to 
those which have to do with Arias’s life and where her life was going. The markers well and 
you know occur again in Excerpt 6 with the same meaning effects as described in Excerpts 4 
and 5.   

In Excerpt 7, the first version of Ms. Willmott’s question is “And this is when?”, referring to 
Alexander sending a photograph of his genitalia to Arias. In the second version “When is it 
that he sent -- approximately when is it that he sent you a picture of his genitalia?”, we can 
see that one part of the meaning established before is still preserved, but now transformed by 
resuming her previous question. In other words, in the second version, she preserved the exact 
word used in the first version (when), added some new information, and transformed it into a 
more objective question. The real intention is to know when Mr. Alexander sent a photograph 
of his genitalia to Arias, but due to Mr. Martinez’s objection, Ms. Willmott restates her 
question in a more accurate way. An interesting point is the use of approximately in the 
middle of the sentence. To avoid further objections, she prefers to introduce a general term 
that could protect Arias’s face in case her answer was vague or not precise.   

In Excerpt 8, another objection is raised by Mr. Martinez. He claims again that the 
defendant’s answer is not responsive to the question “What is it that you’re learning?”. 
However, in this case, we do not observe any preservation property in Ms. Willmott’s second 
version of the question, but rather deletion and transformation characteristics: “What was Mr. 
Alexander’s description of premarital, LDS of you want premarital sex”. The message in the 
original question is totally deleted and transformed into a new one, so much more specific.  
After several unsuccessful previous attempts against prosecutor’s objections, Ms. Willmott 
chooses to restate her question quite directly (yes/no question), thus preventing the 
defendant’s answer from a new objection.  

Our analysis shows that formulations are very important tools in courtroom interaction since 
the questioners can selectively preserve, omit, alter, or even add to what the interlocutors have 
said. It is also relevant to consider that, by means of a textual-interactive perspective to the 
spoken language, it is possible to observe the process of text construction as well as the 
strategies that are employed to achieve the interests and purposes of the participants in this 
kind of forensic context. 

According to the findings, all properties of formulations, combined or not, were used: 
preservation, deletion, and transformation; although the majority of the cases had a 
predominantly transformative function. The cross-examining lawyer preserved some of the 
defendant’s words exactly, for example: that makes sense in “when you say that makes sense 
although it makes sense” (here, the words were preserved deictically in the second occurrence 
as that had a grammatical substitute it). In other moments, he omitted some aspects of the 
sense, but he mostly used altered forms in his formulations, that is, by transforming what the 
defendant had said, he offered his own version of what she had said and invited the listeners 
to agree with the interpretation that he had in mind.  

It is important to call attention to the use of so-prefaced questions and the markers correct and 
right functioning as tag questions in some prosecutor’s formulations. So-prefaced questions 
were very useful to challenge and transform the defendant’s account by putting pressure on 
her to reformulate it in a more convenient way for the accusation. In relation of the discourse 
markers and tag questions above, we observed a degree of coerciveness in the cross-
examining lawyer’s questioning. These types of questions are more coercive as they oﬀer a 
limited possible set of answers and, pragmatically speaking, they imply that the interlocutor 
knows that the questioner is right. 

As observed in our corpus, mitigation devices contributed to preserve the self-image 
constructed by speakers as well as to produce certain meaning effects on listeners. The hedge 
technically and markers such as I think, I don’t think, and I don’t believe collaborated to 
neutralize possible contrary reactions or negative interpretations from interlocutors; they 
lessen the impact of speakers’ utterances and decisions by distancing their image from 
divergent judgments or opinions, therefore protecting their positive face. When the Judge 
sustained the objections claimed by the deputy county attorney, for instance, she chose to 
employ politeness strategies with the defense lawyer. To reduce the force of an imperative 
form, she used “why don’t you restate” in: “why don’t you just restate the question that you 
technically asked her”, which functions as a polite request that plays down its face threat. 

Both in ordinary conversation and in forensic settings, the particular circumstances in which 
questions and answers are developed make facework a constant need in verbal interactions. 
Since it is not possible to predict what interlocutors think or act, speakers employ mechanisms 
to ensure the defense of what they do not want to see exhibited and highlight what they want 
to be shown. According to Flower (2018, p. 31), facework strategies have multiple uses 
intended to save, maintain, give, and threaten face.   

Politeness strategies are also valuable mechanisms that speakers use to soften the 
illocutionary force of what they say. They are sociointeractional strategies which are 
associated with people’s necessity of gaining approval from others as well as the need to 
safeguard their autonomy. Among these strategies, we point out the use metadiscursive 
expressions, evasive forms, paraphrases, and markers that indicate higher or lower degrees of 
speaker’s involvement, among other linguistic phenomena. 

Regarding the monitoring of information flow, we consider the concept of involvement 
elaborated by Chafe (1982, p. 47): “involvement includes monitoring by the speaker of the 
communication channel which exists with the listener, and attempts to make sure that the 
channel is functioning well”. The speaker can employ certain strategies that help the 
reaffirmation of what is being said by calling listeners’ attention to a certain point of the 
subject in progress. Therefore, well, you know, and I mean, among other markers, are very 
appropriate for this kind of function. 

Based on a textual-interactive approach to the spoken language, this study lies at the interface 
between conversation analysis and forensic linguistics. In the same vein, we hope, above all, 
to encourage the development of further analyses and reflections that may contribute to the 
studies concerning spoken texts in forensic contexts.   

My deepest gratefulness to professor Dr. Richard Malcolm Coulthard, whose support and 
contributions were essential in all stages of this research. 
