Microorganisms are becoming resistant to the commonly used chemical disinfectants. 
Thereby, these chemical products should now be replaced by natural ones. In this context, this 
research aimed to evaluate the disinfectant activity of the extract and decoction of Libidibia 
ferrea leaves in different surfaces. Thus, two forms of jucá leaf extraction (decoction and 
hydroalcoholic extraction) were tested through the diffusion disk technique from Kirby and 
Bauer, growth curve, acceptability test with the population, and surface test. Results showed 
sensibility to decoction of S. aureus and E. faecalis strains; however, for the extract, the 
strains that demonstrated sensibility were S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, Micrococcus spp. 
Corynebacterium spp., and S. Typhimurium in the diffusion disk test. A reduction of the 
bacterial charge throughout the growth curve was seen through the absorbance values after 24 
hours to the strains of E. coli, E. feacalis, Micrococcus spp. and K. pneumoniae in the 
concentration of 100 mg/mL of the decoction and extract. Regarding the surfaces test, there 
was a reduction in the bacterial charge in all tested strains. Therefore, the L. ferrea may be 
used as an effective alternative disinfectant measure. 

Microorganisms, such as Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa, can 
adapt to different environments and be easily spread by humans through food, and they can 
also be distributed in the environment, air, dust, and sewage water. In general, 
microorganisms are becoming resistant to the commonly used chemical disinfectants, either 
by its use and incorrect destination or by the formation of biofilms or resistance transfer 
(DOLAN; COSTERTON, 2002). 

Therefore, these products should now be replaced by natural ones, which present a 
lower degree of toxicity, being more economically viable and more accessible to the 
population (VOLKART; SPAGIARI; BIZZANI, 2017; NÓBREGA; DANTAS; SILVA, 
2010). Among the species of used plants is the Libidibia ferrea (Febaceae) that is natural of 
the Caatinga biome and has been described from the Northeast to the South of Brazil. It is 
popularly known as Pau-ferro, Pau-caí or Jucá (MOTA; FERREIRA; IMAÑA, 2012). The 
Libidibia ferrea has antifungal, antibacterial, antiulcerogenic, anti-inflammatory, antidiabetic, 
anti-flu, antitussive, anti-asthmatic, antianemia, antidiarrheal, anticoagulant, analgesic, and 
healing actions. It is also a larvicide against the Aedes aegypti, and it is indicated for feeding 
animals as in sheep and goat farming, widely used in rural areas, given the difficulty of food 
(GOMES et al., 2017; MOREIRA; OLIVEIRA, 2017; REIS et al., 2017; PEREIRA et al., 
2016; HASSAN et al., 2015; FREITAS et al., 2015; MAGALHÃES et al., 2014; VÁSQUEZ; 
MENDONÇA; NODA, 2014; LIMA et al., 2012; VASCONCELOS et al., 2011). 

Despite the proven action of Libidibia ferrea, more studies that explore its use as a 
disinfectant for surfaces is required in this context. Thus, this research aimed at evaluating the 
disinfectant activity of the extract and decoction of Libidibia ferrea leaves in different 
surfaces. 

Microbiological analyzes and decoction production of Libidibia ferrea leaves were 
carried out at the Veterinary Microbiology Laboratory (LAMIV) of Universidade Federal do 
Semi-Árido (UFERSA). The analyses of phytochemical compounds and extract 
hydroalcoholic production of Libidibia ferrea leaves were performed at the Chromatography 
Laboratory of Universidade Estadual do Rio Grande do Norte (UERN). 

Microorganisms isolated from the environment (Staphylococcus aureus, Micrococcus 
spp., Corynebacterium spp. – LAMIV) and standard strains (Staphylococcus aureus – 
American Type Culture Collection – ATCC 25923, Escherichia coli – ATCC 25922, 
Enterococcus faecalis – ATCC 29212, Pseudomonas aeruginosa – ATCC 27853, 
Streptococcus agalactiae – ATCC 13813, Salmonella Typhimurium – ATCC 14028, 
Klebsiella pneumoniae – ATCC 700603) were used for this research. 

100 g of leaves from L. ferrea were used for decoction and they were deposited at a 
container with 200 mL of distilled water. Then, they were successively boiled at water bath 
for 15 minutes to produce 200 mL of decoction. The produced solution was considered at the 
concentration of 1:2 (LEONEZ et al., 2018). In the hydroalcoholic extract production, the 
leaves were shredded, weighted and wrapped into a properly identified amber glass container 
that was immersed during seven days in a hydroalcoholic solvent solution (ethanol 70%), 
which was agitated every 24 hours. After the immersion time, the compound was taken to 
vacuum filtration, and afterwards to the evaporated in water bath at a temperature of 50 ± ºC. 

Microorganisms with the 1.5 × 108 UFC/mL concentration were equivalent to the 
pattern 5 of the McFarland’s scale. These were cultivated in brain heart infusion (BHI) broth 
at 37ºC. Five microdilution plates with 96 wells each were utilized (ALAMAR®, Diadema, 
São Paulo, Brazil). Each microorganism had its growth analyzed in triplicate at the 
concentrations of 100 mg/mL from the extract and from the decoction, as well with the 
positive control with the alcoholic solution of chlorhexidine (CP) at 0.5% and the negative 
control of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). 

The methodology proposed by Engel et al. (2017) was adapted in order to evaluate the 
surface disinfectant effects. Plastic, steel, and ceramics surfaces were washed and sterilized 
for use. Afterwards, the surfaces were left in contact with the inoculum in a concentration of 
approximately 108 UFC/mL during 30 minutes for biofilm formation. Posteriorly, the 
disinfectant solutions were sprayed at 100 mg/mL and control product, for 15 minutes, in an 
area of 1 cm3. Then, the samples were collected with a sterilized swab, and the number of 
microorganisms was quantified by the plate count technique (TORTORA; FUNKE; CASE, 
2012). 

50 judges belonging to the traditional rural communities of Mossoró/RN were randomly 
chosen to perform the acceptability test on the action of L. ferrea-based disinfectant at the 
concentration of 100 mg/mL, which was noticed in the in vitro test (PAGANI et al., 2015). A 
hedonic scale adapted from Pagani et al. (2015) and Beserra et al. (2003) was applied to 
evaluate the two surfaces: one with the commonly used disinfectant and the other with the 
disinfectant made of jucá leaves. Each judge received a file including the sensorial evaluation, 
with a nine-point structure, from “extremely liked” to “extremely disliked”, to each evaluated 
attribute (aroma, color, texture, and surface aspect). 

Data were expressed in mean values ± standard deviation as well with frequency (%) 
through the SigmaPlot program (Systat Software, Inc.), version 12.0. After analysis of the 
parametric assumptions and statistical differences between the experimental groups, in the 
different studied variables, there was a comparative analysis between the microorganisms and 
the decoction and extract, as well as between the varied concentrations applied to both the 
decoction and the extract, for one-way ANOVA and one-way ANOVA repeated measures 
(RM) followed by Turkey’s test, respectively. The nonparametric data were tested by 
Kruskal-Wallis and Friedman tests. Lastly, the statistical differences of the scores related to 
the sensorial analysis between groups were obtained by Wilcoxon’s text. Values of p < 0.05 
were considered significant. 

Diffusion test results in wells used the decoction and the hydroalcoholic extract from C. 
ferrea leaves to the bacteria are described in Tables 1 and 2. It has been noticed that the 
strains of Staphylococcus aureus and Enterococcus faecalis demonstrated sensibility at the 
concentration of 100 mg/mL regarding the decoction of L. ferrea with halos of 10 and 10.67 
mm, respectively. According to Thomazi, Bertolin and Pinto (2010), such values were 
considered satisfactorily, whereas they were sensitive for halos equal to or larger than 10 mm. 

Regarding to the results of the L. ferrea extract (Table 2), the strains of Escherichia 
coli, Streptococcus agalactiae and Klebsiella pneumoniae did not form satisfactory inhibition 
halos. The decoction utilized at the concentrations of 100, 50, 25 and 12.5 mg/mL inhibited 
the growth of the E. faecalis strains, being the highest statistical concentration similar to the 
positive control. These results are justified by the cell wall composition of the Gram-positive 
microbial agent, which is more simplified than Gram-negative bacteria. It is noteworthy that 
these results are promising, since the decoction technique of L. ferrea is simple, decreasing 
the quantity of these microorganisms in surfaces of tools. 

The decoction did not inhibit the strains of Klebsiella pneumoniae, E. coli, 
Pseudomonas aeruginosas, and Salmonella Typhimurium. These bacteria are Gram-negative 
and present structures at the cell wall, as the outer membrane, composed by lipids and 
lipopolysaccharides (TORTORA; FUNKE; CASE, 2012) that may hinder the entrance of 
hydrophilic molecules present in the decoction. 

Table 3 includes the results of the growth curve utilizing the hydroalcoholic extract and 
the decoction of L. ferrea to strains that presented sensibility utilizing the best concentration 
(100 mg/mL), which was noticed in the diffusion technique in wells. In the decoction, we 
noticed that the E. feacalis strain obtained a reduction in the absorbance value of 0.24. 
Although the S. aureus had its absorbance value reduced in 0.07, there was no statistical 
difference. Since for the extract there was a reduction in the bacterial number considering the 
absorbance after 24 hours, in the strains of P. aeruginosa, we obtained a difference in the 
absorbance value of 0.36. It was verified that although there was an increase in the absorbance 
value of Corynebacterium spp., E. feacalis and Salmonella Typhimurium of 0.06, 0.03, and 
0.14, respectively, these did not present statistical difference as for the positive control.  

The results indicate that the hydroalcoholic extract presented a more efficient effect than 
that presented by the decoction, since the absorbance values were lower after 24 hours and it 
has inhibited the development and growth of microorganisms as P. aeruginosas and 
Salmonella Typhimurium. When comparing the results between the microorganisms, it may 
be observed a lower bacterial charge between themselves, presenting a statistical difference. 

Such variation may occur due to the different forms of extraction, since the extract may 
have molecules that can penetrate the outer membrane of the Gram-negative bacteria cell 
wall, but not in Gram-positive ones (DUFFY; POWER, 2001). Or yet, it can happen due to 
phytochemical compounds in the extract that presented a higher bioactivity on Gram-negative 
bacteria, because of a higher affinity from these by its membrane lipid structure that 
surrounds them, as evidenced by Engel et al. (2017), where the utilized strains of Salmonella 
were more sensible than the strains of S. aureus both for the disinfectant containing carvacrol 
and for the disinfectant containing timol. 

A reduction of UFC/mL/cm2 was observed considering all tested microorganisms 
(Table 4). As a result, in all tested strains, there was bacterial reduction of the extract and 
decoction with statistical difference, considering the negative control, in all surfaces, with the 
exception of the Salmonella Typhimurium in relation to the steel. Therefore, it was observed 
that the related data are according to Oliveira et al. (2017). In order to have a good 
disinfectant it is necessary that it has the capacity to destroy or to inactivate the pathogenic 
organisms to be eliminated, in a reasonable time, with a good cost/benefit, presenting facility 
and safety in its transport, storage, handling, and application.9 

The results, according to the variables smell, color, texture, surface aspect (based on its 
cleanliness and brightness), utilized to evaluate the acceptability of the disinfectant are 
described in Table 5. In all the evaluated criteria there was a higher acceptability of the 
disinfectant made from L. ferrea leaves, with a higher frequency of acceptance (83.6%) in the 
aroma. There is no report of natural products utilized as disinfectants, regarding acceptability. 
However, Teixeira and Becker (2017) claim that the best product for disinfection and 
sanitation in surfaces is the 70% alcohol, since it is so effective as sodium hypochlorite, with 
a contact of at least 10 minutes. 

The decoction and extract of L. ferrea may be utilized as an efficient alternative of 
disinfectant measurement, because it has antimicrobial activity in Gram-positive and negative 
strains. It can also be used due to its reduction of the bacterial charge in the tested surfaces 
and its excellent acceptability by the audience. 
