The objective of this research was to determine the cultural differences in the execution 
of neuropsychological tests between a group of preschoolers with typical development in 
the province of Cienfuegos and another one in Sancti Spíritus, both in Cuba; as well as to 
identify the neuropsychological functions that influence intellectual performance. Sixty-
seven children were selected and subdivided into groups. The Raven's Progressive 
Matrices Intelligence Test and the Luria Initial Neuropsychological Battery were used as 
neuropsychological evaluation instruments. The results showed significant differences in 
intelligence and various neuropsychological functions between the provinces. The 
neuropsychological variables influencing intellectual performance varied depending on 
the cultural groups. Taken together, the results suggest that cultural differences demand 
diverse patterns of cognitive skills that uniquely influence the development of intelligence 
and neuropsychological factors in preschool childhood.  

The influence of culture and education on the results of neuropsychological tests has been 
noted for several years, especially the variability between culturally different groups in 
functions such as language, memory, visuospatial skills and intelligence (Fog, 2021). 
The variability of results in neuropsychological tests is an important indicator to be 
considered in the scientific community due to the relationship it has with the validity and 
standardization of the tests, with the effective classification of neuropsychological 
alterations and with the therapeutic and educational approach in countries with many 
immigrants such as the United States and the European Community (Mercado et al., 
2019).  

Faced with this problem, some solution proposals have emerged, firstly, to apply several 
tests selected from different neuropsychological batteries (cross-battery) (Franzen, et al., 
2022), and secondly, to apply non-verbal neuropsychological tests (Ben et al., 2021).  
The cross-battery procedure is a suitable opportunity for examiners, as it allows using 
tests that are more effective for the subject according to his or her cultural and educational 
condition (Franzen, et al., 2022; Daugherty, et al, 2017; Puente, et al, 2017). Said authors 
recommend using the procedure to decrease errors in diagnosis due to cultural or 
educational effect, even to avoid death sentence in the US Supreme Court. According to 
the authors, the classification standards for an American is not the same as for a Hispanic 
American, both coexist in the same cultural space, although the diagnosis of a 
neurological disease or the ruling of a court may be influenced by the effect of the culture 
and education of the subject. Therefore, an error in diagnosis by classification regulations 
can change a subject's life, as an inmate with mental retardation or neurological diseases 
is not sentenced to death (Daugherty, et al., 2017; Puente, et al., 2017). 

Another proposed solution is to use several visual type tests, as it is expected not to have 
a high cultural and educational burden. The subject to answer this type of tasks should 
preferably use strategies with a minimum of specialized knowledge, such as up - down, 
right - left, shallow - deep, size and color. However, nonverbal tests are not completely 
free of cultural bias, as thinking schemes vary from one culture to another. Nevertheless, 
in the child population it is an adequate solution.   

Although these solutions exist, some authors recognize that the variability of 
neuropsychological tests in the pediatric population is more complex than thought.    
Solovieva et al., (2021), highlight that sociocultural factors have been identified as 
determinants to explain the variability of neuropsychological development, while other 
reviews highlight the effect on psychometric intelligence (Rea-Sandin et al., 2021).  

Scarce neuropsychological research in the child population has shown that children's 
performance can vary significantly by cultural, educational and socioeconomic effects; in 
particular, the few results have revealed differences in cognitive and socioemotional 
development in preschoolers (Lohndorf, et al., 2019). However, Porto et al. (2021), Rea-
Sandin and Causadias (2021) specify that the variability is more significant in executive 
functions due to the effect of the parents' educational level.  

The above results have in common the contributions of Ardila (1995), who suggests 
analyzing neuropsychology and its relationship with culture and education through six 
units of analysis: (1) the standardization of current basic neuropsychological instruments 
should consider the cultural and educational changes of the target subjects, as well as the 
cultural context where standardization takes place, (2) elaboration and validation of 
neuropsychological tests specific to the cultural context, (3) the analysis of educational 
factors and subcultural variations in relation to test performance, (4) the analysis of 
cognitive disorders in cases of brain pathology in different cultural and educational 
contexts, (5) the search for commonalities in neuropsychological performance among 
existing human groups, and (6) the analysis of the origins of cognitive activity. 

From this position, researchers have used these suggestions to improve the design, 
validation, and standardization of psychometric and neuropsychological tests in various 
cultural contexts. Similarly, it has been used to analyze in depth neuropsychological 
diagnosis in countries with abundant migrants (Daugherty, et al., 2017; Puente, et al., 
2017).   

However, few scientific studies have been reported where neuropsychological 
performance is compared in children living together in the same country of origin 
(Burneo-Garcés, et al., 2018). In addition, the few studies perform a comparative analysis 
between groups through descriptive statistics and to a lesser extent with more rigorous 
methodological tools such as Cohen's d.  

In Cuba, attempts have been oriented towards the characterization of preschool children 
with typical development and in clinical populations (Prieto, et al., 2020) however, few 
studies have been reported focused on comparing neuropsychological performance in 
different provinces, which could be an alternative to organize stimulation strategies 
according to the particularities of the province and its culture.  

In response to these limitations, the present study aims to: (1) Determine the variability 
of neuropsychological tests between a group of preschoolers with typical development in 
the province of Cienfuegos and another in Sancti Spiritus, both located in Cuba, and (2) 
Identify the neuropsychological functions that influence intellectual performance taking 
into account that both are provinces with different cultural characteristics, but with a 
similar education policy. 

In the present research, a cross-sectional comparative study was conducted in the period 
from January to December 2019. From a total of seventy-seven children aged 5 and 6 
years with typical development, they were selected and subdivided into groups according 
to the province of the country (Sancti Spíritus and Cienfuegos) (Table 1). The groups 
were balanced following the criteria of methodological parity according to sex in the 
different provinces of the country studied. The distribution analysis obtained a normal 
equivalence between both groups (χ2: 0.633). 

The children were randomly selected from several classrooms, using the list provided by 
the school teachers. The selection of children and educational institutions was made based 
on the following criteria of the researchers: (1) The children had to reach percentile ≥ 50 
on the Raven's Matrices intelligence test according to a Cuban cut-off point (Ramírez, et 
al. 2017); (2) The children had to be natives of the province of Cienfuegos and Sancti 
Spíritus from urban area. All study participants were children with typical development, 
without medical or neurological problems. 

Raven's Progressive Matrices Intelligence Test. It consists of 36 problems, which are 
presented in a paper notebook. Each of them consists of an incomplete figure that the 
child must complete. It is a classic test to measure fluid intelligence. The Cuban norms of 
Ramírez et al. (2017) were used. The instrument shows adequate levels of reliability in 
the Cuban context. The analysis indicated, 91% of the items with good discrimination 
indices (items - total) (Ramírez et al., 2017). 

Luria Inicial neuropsychological battery: The instrument evaluates four domains of 
cognition for children aged 4 to 6 years, these are: executive, linguistic, speed and 
memory; as well as, a manual lateralization test (Ramirez, et al., 2015). It is made up of 
14 tests that are grouped into executive domain (test 1 to 5: manual dexterity, right-left 
orientation, manual gestures and orofacial praxis, verbal control of the motor act, 
reproduction of visuospatial patterns). Linguistic domain (tests 6 to 10: visual perception 
of objects and sets of drawings for naming, phonemic hearing, vocabulary in images, 
reasoning by verbal analogy and numerical operations). Processing speed domain (tests 
11 and 12: rapid naming of pictures and colors). Learning and memory domain (tests 13 
and 14: verbal memory and visual memory). Manual laterality (preference, speed and 
manual recognition) in order to know the state of specialization of the cerebral 
hemispheres. In the proposed research, the Cuban regulations were used (Ramírez, et al., 
2015). 

The purpose of this research was initially explained to school principals. Subsequently, 
preschool teachers were informed of the characteristics of the different 
neuropsychological tests; so also parents were contacted and interviewed. Parental 
consent was obtained and parents were given the time needed to complete the 
neuropsychological screening battery.  

The Research Ethics Committee of the Center for the Study of Educational Sciences, 
Faculty of Pedagogical Sciences of the “José Martí Pérez” University of Sancti Spíritus, 
Cuba approved the research. 

The research was carried out in three sessions, with a duration of 45 to 60 minutes and 5 
minutes of rest when the children required it. In the first session, the children's Raven test 
was performed; and in the second and third sessions, the Luria Initial Neuropsychological 
Battery was administered. They were distributed in this way, with the aim of avoiding 
mental fatigue and demotivation of the child by the instrument. 

Once the primary data were collected, a database was created with the study variables, 
using the SPSS statistical package for Windows version 11.5, to facilitate the statistical 
processing of the information. The study variables were characterized using the arithmetic 
mean, standard deviation and contingency table.  

First, the Chi-square test was used to determine the parity criteria between some 
demographic variables of the study, such as sex. The t-test (mean comparison test for 
independent samples) was used to compare the mean of the study groups in the different 
neuropsychological variables and intelligence. The calculation of the magnitude of the 
effect size was applied in order to identify the size of the differences in the variables 
studied. For this purpose, Cohen's d was used, where values of 0.2, 0.5 and 0.8 represent 
small, medium and large effect sizes, respectively.  

A simple linear regression analysis was performed using the values of the 
neuropsychological tests in the two provinces of the country. Neuropsychological 
variables were used as predictors (independent variable) and the dependent variables were 
the values of intellectual performance evaluated with the Raven (nonverbal) for 
preschoolers. A radial graph was used for the presentation of the results with the purpose 
of representing the neuropsychological profiles based on the weaknesses and strengths 
between both provinces of the country. In all cases when the significance of the test was 
less than 0.05, then we say that significant differences exist. 

In the analysis of the demographic variables, no differences were found with respect to 
sex and age in the two provinces of the country (Table 1).  

The table 2 shows the results of the differences in neuropsychological development and 
intelligence in preschoolers in the two provinces of the country. According to Students’t, 
there are significant differences in intelligence, manual dexterity, manual gestures and 
praxis, verbal regulation of the motor act, visual denomination of objects and figures, 
phonematic hearing, vocabulary in images, numerical operations, quick denomination of 
colors, in favor of the group belonging to the province of Sancti Spíritus. However, 
significant differences in picture naming and visual memory were obtained in favor of 
the group belonging to the province of Cienfuegos (Figure 1).  

No differences in manual laterality were found between the two provinces of the country. 
Cohen's d was calculated to obtain the effect sizes (Table 2). 

When the level of prediction presented by the results of the neuropsychological variables 
on intelligence was checked, disparate and coincident findings were found between the 
provinces of Sancti Spíritus and Cienfuegos. 

First, the processes of right-left orientation, verbal regulation, spatial orientation, naming 
objects and drawings, similarities and differences; as well as numerical operations were 
predictors of intellectual performance in both preschool children of Sancti Spíritus and 
Cienfuegos provinces (Table 3). 

Secondly, although neuropsychological variables coincide in both provinces of the 
country, there are particular differences that are relevant in the research. For example: in 
the province of Sancti Spíritus, it has been proved that fine motor skills (t= 2.059; p= 
0.048), drawing denomination (t= -2.890; p= 0.007) and speed with the right upper limb 
(t= 3.477; p= 0.001), are neuropsychological variables that significantly predict 
intellectual performance in preschoolers of this province. The level of prediction for each 
variable fluctuated between 0.089 and 0.252 (Table 3), while the performance of the same 
neuropsychological tasks, in the Cienfuegos group, were not predictors for the 
development of intelligence in children. 

On the other hand, gestures and praxis (t= 6.229; p= 0.000), phonemic hearing (t= 7.974; 
p= 0.000), picture vocabulary (t= 8.187; p= 0.000), and color naming (t= 3.228; p= 0.003) 
were found to significantly predict the variability of intellectual performance in children 
from Cienfuegos province. The level of prediction for each variable ranged from 0.217 to 
0.660 (Table 3). The results of the same neuropsychological tests in children from Sancti 
Spíritus, were not significant in predicting the variability of intelligence performance. 

The present investigation revealed that the neuropsychological performance of the 
espirituanos was notably better than the cienfuegueros in the tests that evaluated executive 
functions (manual motor skills, gestures and praxis, verbal regulation), language (naming 
objects and figures, phonemic hearing, image vocabulary and numerical operations), 
speed in naming colors and verbal memory. Cienfuegos preschool children obtained 
better results in speed in naming pictures and in visual memory. In intellectual 
performance, there were also significant differences between the two groups.  

In the case of executive functions or functions related to frontal lobe development, Ardila 
et al. (1995) have shown that one factor that may influence the differences between groups 
is the socioeconomic status of the parents. However, some studies indicate that it has no 
effect on Cuban child development (Jiménez-Colín, et al., 2018), although others indicate 
the opposite (Mora & Anangonó, 2016). 

Porto et al., (2021) showed the importance of language in parents and its influence on the 
neuropsychological development of the child. According to these authors, the educational 
level of the parents is a good measure to expect a good development in the child and 
differentiate from other infants with different condition. Certainly, it is an accurate 
position and although it was not the objective of the present research, in Cuba, 7 out of 
10 adults are professionals according to the last population CENSUS. Therefore, this 
condition may not be the ideal one to justify the differences between the Cienfuegos and 
Santi Spíritus groups; however, it should be reviewed, since sometimes highly educated 
or professional parents are very busy and share their child's education with other non-
professionals (caregivers).  

From this last idea, a result of Fernández-Hernández et al. (2022) emerges, which showed 
that parents who participate little in recreational and sports activities with their children 
have a negative effect on the development of executive functions in their children. The 
question is, do parents from Cienfuegos and Espiritu play with their children frequently? 
What kind of games do they use? These are interesting questions that could justify part 
of the results of the study. In this sense, these questions could open the doors to new 
propositions for future lines of scientific research on preschool children.   

If the differences between groups are important, the similarities are a point of analysis of 
the problem. In both groups, age, sex, urbanity and the educational model (Cuban 
program in preschool education) were controlled. Therefore, these variables do not justify 
the neuropsychological variability between the groups. Similarly, the variables right-left 
orientation, similarity and differences, as well as manual laterality did not show 
differences between the groups. 

These results can be justified according to the intense or low educational stimulation in 
both groups. It is thought that intense stimulation may explain the similarity because most 
preschool games contain many activities where comparisons are made between objects 
(similarities and differences); as well as other motor activities where the child is required 
to use his right or left hand depending on his manual preference. However, it is also 
possible to think of low stimulation or slow development in these neuropsychological 
variables. In other Cuban research similarity - difference and right - left orientation have 
been identified as skills with slow development in preschool children according to their 
chronological age (Ramirez, et al., 2015).  

Regarding the intellectual development of the groups, it could be observed that the 
performance in the Raven test of the espirituanos was significantly higher compared to 
the Cienfuegueros group. These obtained results emphasize the notion that nonverbal tests 
are not necessarily free of cultural influence (Ben et al., 2021). Furthermore, it highlights 
that nonverbal tasks contain complex reasoning processes, which mark the differences 
between subjects. Certainly, Raven's Matrices require simple solution strategies (up-
down, right-left), although they also include other implicit strategies such as induction-
deduction, comparison of inferences, classification, hypothesis generation and evaluation, 
identification of relationships and extrapolation of images. 

The study showed that performance on various neuropsychological tasks influence 
variability in IQ, which is consistent with results from previous studies (Muchiut et al., 
2021). However, in the group of children from Sancti Spíritus province (higher IQ group) 
it was detected that fine motor and manual skills, increased as key neuropsychological 
predictors contributing to higher intellectual performance in preschool childhood.  

Indeed, frontal lobe development favors the development of motor and fluid intelligence, 
both of which benefit from the maturation of these brain structures (Khng & Ng, 2021). 
Therefore, the evidence verifies that intelligence can be stimulated not only with 
reasoning-type tasks, but also with game situations and activities where perception and 
motor skills lead to reasoning and analysis. In the same sense, this result is consistent with 
the study by Fernández-Hernández et al. (2022), who revealed that the child's physical 
conditions contribute to the development and performance of higher cognitive functions.   
Despite little control of educational and cultural variables, the present investigation shows 
that there is significant neuropsychological and intellectual variability between groups of 
children even when they live in the same country. This proves that three points should be 
considered when applying cognitive and neuropsychological tests in the child population: 
first, the standardization and validity of tests according to the characteristics of the region. 
Second, to establish norms for classifying and issuing a diagnosis. Third, to make an 
assessment of the sociocultural characteristics of the child, including its context, parental 
stimulation and the educational institutions involved.  

Thus, the present research considers that neuropsychological and intellectual 
development in preschool childhood depends on sociocultural factors. These factors 
should be analyzed by different categories that will allow a better visibility of their 
impact, such as the family (organization, functions), the characteristics of the parents 
(level of education, style of education, stimulation activities (frequency, intensity, type of 
activities), and the educational institutions (educational programs, type of educator, 
frequency of stimulation, activities carried out).  It would be important for future research 
to observe these variables from the sociology of culture and their relationship with the 
development of neuropsychological functions. 
