The novel coronavirus, named severe acute respiratory 
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), is responsible 
for the outbreak of the viral pneumonia identified for 
the first time in the Chinese city of Wuhan at the end 
of 2019. The outbreak has expanded rapidly, affecting 
184 countries. The experience acquired in past months 
identified different clinical presentations with varied 
severity, ranging from asymptomatic infection to death 
due to multiple organic dysfunction. The World Health 
Organization (WHO) has recently defined the complex 
process of the SARS-CoV-2 infection as novel coronavirus 
disease 2019 (COVID-19). 

COVID-19, whose notification grows fast in different 
countries, currently affects more than one million people 
worldwide according to the WHO, which has characterized 
the infection as a pandemic.1 As of April 29, 2020, Brazil had 
registered 73,235 confirmed cases of COVID-19 and 5,083 
deaths, with a case-fatality rate of 6,9%.2 Hospitalization is 
necessary in up to 20% of the patients infected by SARS-
CoV-2, and 5% to 10% of them require admission to the 
intensive care unit because of the need for hemodynamic 
and/or ventilatory support.3-7 The mortality rate ranges from 
0.8% to 12% depending on the country, and this difference 
might result from multiple factors, of which the healthcare 
system structure stands out.8-11 Patients with the moderate 
and severe forms of the disease had manifestations mainly 
of the respiratory system involvement, with clinical findings 
ranging from mild pneumonia to acute respiratory distress 
syndrome (ARDS).7,11-13

Complications usually occur between the 7th and 12th 
day of disease.3,14 The most severe clinical manifestation, 
ARDS, is characterized by hypoxemia, bilateral pulmonary 
infiltrate, and variable phenotypic presentations, such 
as ‘normal lung compliance and low potential for lung 
recruitment’ and ‘low lung compliance and high potential 
for lung recruitment’. From 20% to 30% of the patients have 
cardiovascular complications, such as myocardial ischemia, 
acute coronary syndrome, myocarditis, arrhythmias, heart 
failure and shock. Kidney failure occurs in 30-50% of critically 
ill patients infected by SARS-CoV-2, 30% of whom require 
renal replacement therapy.14-17

The SARS-CoV-2 enters the cell via the angiotensin-
converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor present in the alveoli. 
The severe form of the infection is characterized by an 
intense immune-inflammatory response, evidenced by 
the presence of neutrophils, lymphocytes, monocytes and 
macrophages.18 Minimally invasive autopsies have revealed 
diffuse alveolar damage, hyaline membrane formation 
and interstitial mononuclear inflammatory infiltrate, with 
microcirculatory thrombosis.17 High serum levels of pro-
inflammatory cytokines (interleukins 1 and 6, tumor necrosis 
factor and interferon-g), known as “cytokine storm”, have 
been reported in those patients.

Thrombosis and damage to extrapulmonary organs have 
been observed without the confirmed presence of the 
virus in those sites, which led to the assumption that SARS-
CoV-2 infection involves intense inflammatory response 
with a hypercoagulable state and ischemia, aggravated by 
hypoxemia.17,19,20 In Brazil, preliminary findings of minimally 
invasive autopsies performed at the São Paulo Medical School 
have shown similar results to those from China.21

When elevated, D-dimer, a product of fibrin degradation, 
has been associated with a higher mortality rate.22 Expert 
opinion, based on clinical experience and analysis of a few 
descriptive studies, highlights the role of the hypercoagulable 
state on the pathophysiology of COVID-19, supported by the 
progressive increase in D-dimer levels as the disease worsens. 
The phase in which ARDS develops and the radiographic 
pattern worsens is marked by the significant elevation of 
D-dimer. The most severe cases develop myocardial injury 
and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC).23,24

Systemic inflammatory response in patients with infection 
can result in endothelial damage, with a consequent increase 
in thrombin generation and a reduction in endogenous 
fibrinolysis.25,26 This prothrombotic state is called sepsis-
induced coagulopathy (SIC) and precedes DIC.27,28 The several 
mechanisms involved in SIC act simultaneously towards a 
pro-hemostatic state. Apparently, inflammatory cytokines are 
the most important factors mediating that coagulation system 
disorder during sepsis.

Evidence has shown a bidirectional relationship between 
inflammation and coagulation, in which inflammation 
activates coagulation, and coagulation heightens inflammatory 
activity (Figure 1).29-32 Platelets play a central role in the 
development of coagulation abnormalities in sepsis and they 
can be activated directly by pro-inflammatory mediators, 
such as platelet activating factors, as well as by the thrombin 
generated. Platelet activation can also stimulate the formation 
of fibrin via an alternative mechanism. The expression of 
P-selectin in platelet membrane not only mediates the 
adhesion of platelets to leukocytes and endothelial cells, 
but also increases the tissue factor expression in monocytes. 
Under normal circumstances, the activation of coagulation 
is controlled by three important physiological anticoagulant 
pathways: the antithrombin system, the activated C-protein 
system, and the tissue-factor pathway inhibitor. In sepsis, all 
three pathways are dysfunctional. Amidst all this coagulation 
system imbalance, endogenous fibrinolysis is largely reduced. 

According to the criteria established by the International 
Society on Thrombosis and Hemostasis (ISTH), better 
clinical outcomes can be identified in patients with SIC on 
anticoagulant therapy.27,28 The use of anticoagulants, mainly in 
critically ill patients, is not free from risk and might be related 
to severe hemorrhagic complications. Thus, the indication of 
anticoagulants should be personalized, respecting thrombotic 
and hemorrhagic risk profiles.

Hemophagocytic syndrome (HPS) is characterized by a 
systemic inflammatory response triggered by the inappropriate 
activation and proliferation of lymphocytes, which activate 
macrophages and histiocytes, resulting in phagocytosis of 
hematological cells. The disease is associated with a large 
production of inflammatory cytokines. The initial clinical 
findings of HPS are marked by those of the systemic 
inflammatory response syndrome. As HPS develops, the 
following might be observed: neurological findings, liver 
function changes, DIC, hepatosplenomegaly, pancytopenia, 
and high ferritin levels. Those findings can be triggered 
by infections, such as COVID-19, which shows, in some 
cases, a large release of cytokines, mainly interleukin 6, in 
association with systemic inflammatory response and DIC. 
Such conditions should be considered based on clinical 
and laboratory findings, and an early therapeutic approach 
should be defined to reverse them.28

SARS-CoV-2 infection, in its most severe presentation, 
marked by organic dysfunction, such as acute respiratory 
failure, meets the diagnostic criteria for sepsis.33 Recent 
observational studies have correlated the hypercoagulable 
state with the severe form of COVID-19, in which SIC 
and/or DIC seem to be present in most fatal cases.3,21-23,34 
The reduction in oxygen arterial pressure found in 
critical patients contributes directly and indirectly to the 
development of ischemic syndrome.35 In line of this, results 
suggest that the prothrombotic pathophysiology already 
described in sepsis might be related to intrinsic aspects of 
the novel coronavirus, and, thus, the beneficial potential 
of the use of anticoagulants in selected groups of patients 
should be analyzed individually. A retrospective study 
conducted in the hospital of Tongji (Wuhan, China) has 
reported lower mortality in patients with severe COVID-19 
who had used anticoagulants, unfractionated heparin or 
low-molecular weight heparin (LMWH), with a SIC score 
of ≥ 4 and/or very high D-dimer (> 6 times the upper limit 
of reference range).36

Anticoagulant therapy in patients with severe COVID-19 
and signs of SIC and/or very high D-dimer in association with 
other biomarkers of severity, in the absence of contraindication 
to anticoagulation, can be considered a therapeutic strategy 
for SARS-CoV-2 infection, based on expert consensus and a 
few retrospective studies. Moreover, that strategy requires the 
use of strict institutional protocols that enable surveillance 
and rapid intervention if complications occur. Figure 2 shows 
the algorithm to assess thrombogenesis in patients with 
COVID-19, as well as a suggestion of treatment. However, 
data are still insufficient to determine important aspects for 
the elaboration of a therapeutic plan, such as the best drug 
choice, its dosage and administration time schedule, as well 
as the duration of treatment. 

Further studies, mainly prospective, are required 
to better support the indication of anticoagulation for 
critical patients infected by the novel coronavirus. The 
possible benefit from attenuating the hypercoagulable 
state should be balanced against the risk of bleeding. 
Anticoagulant therapy might be more beneficial when 
initiated in the pre-thrombotic stage and not in advanced 
phases, when the risk of bleeding is higher. If deciding to 
use anticoagulation, LMWH should be chosen for stable 
patients with normal creatinine clearance (dose of 1 mg/
kg, 12/12h, subcutaneous). In case of shock or creatinine 
clearance below 50 mL/min/m², intravenous heparin (18 
IU/kg/h) should be used, aiming at an activated partial 
thromboplastin time between 1.5 and 1.8. However, there 
is no evidence to support the wide use of the therapeutic 
dose of heparin in COVID-19. 

In conclusion, the pathophysiology of COVID-19 
involves activation of the inflammatory response and 
induction of the thrombotic system. Currently, the expert 
consensus suggests anticoagulant treatment for patients with 
the pro-coagulant phenotype (high D-dimer, prolongation 
of prothrombin time and increased plasma levels of fibrin 
fragments). Further studies are required to confirm the real 
role of anticoagulation to prevent COVID-19 complications.
