Objectives: the purpose of this study was to describe the impact of the COVID-19 
pandemic on Primary Health Care in Brazil.  

Methods: This retrospective ecological study was carried out using Brazilian 
municipality data obtained from the information systems of the National Public Health 
System. The outcomes were medical appointments, prenatal procedures and diabetes 
care. The exposure variable was the occurrence of the COVID-19 pandemic, based on 
the first case notified in Brazil. Multilevel mixed-effects negative binomial regression 
was used to analyze the association between the number of procedures per 10,000 
inhabitants and COVID-19. 

Results: Data from 5,564 Brazilian municipalities were included in the present study. 
Regarding medical appointments, the largest reduction occasioned by the pandemic 
occurred in May (IRR = 0.27, CI 95% [0.24 – 0.30]). As far as prenatal procedures are 
concerned, the reduction was 65% (IRR= 0.35, CI 95% [0.32 – 0.38], also in May. In 
addition, diabetes care saw the biggest reductions in April 2020 (IRR = 0.24, CI 95% 
[0.11 – 0.53]) and May 2020 (IRR = 0.19, CI 95% [0.09 – 0.43]). From February to 
December 2020, the pandemic had a significant effect on the total number of procedures 
evaluated. 

Conclusion: The findings showed a reduction in prenatal procedures, diabetes and 
medical consultations performed in Brazil’s Primary Health Care, subsequent to the 
onset of the COVID-19 pandemic.  

Since 2019, the coronavirus pandemic has changed the global picture and the 
organization of health services 1-4. The first case of COVID-19 in Brazil was recorded in 
February and from then until December 2020, almost 200 thousand lives have been lost 
and almost 8 million cases notified 5. The problems related to the health systems’ 
capacity to cope with the consequences of the pandemic worldwide are well 
documented in the literature and the limitations go far beyond attending cases of the 
disease. The problems are also related to attending the other health demands of the 
population 6. 

The Unified Health System in Brazil (SUS) covers almost 75% of the Brazilian 
population in the country, while the supplementary health care system caters to the 
remaining 25%. In the context of the pandemic, the System is expected to be equipped 
to provide assistance to the growing number of cases of COVID-19 while still attending 
to other acute and chronic conditions 7. Unfortunately, deficiencies in Brazil’s 
healthcare networks, which are still fragmented and inadequate, the lack of coordination 
between health care hierarchies as well as underfunding, have become even more 
evident during the pandemic 7, 8.  

Primary Health Care (PHC) has played an essential role in the context of the 
pandemic with effective care coordination 9. PHC can be responsible for maintaining 
preventive actions, attending to priority groups and responding to certain emergency 
cases related to chronic diseases 7, 10. In addition, it plays an important role in containing 
the dissemination and monitoring of mild or asymptomatic cases in home isolation, in 
addition to engaging with the community. The impact of the pandemic on PHC and 
health services in Brazil with regard to some aspects of care is not yet known. Thus, the 
purpose of this article was to describe the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on 
Primary Health Care with regard to medical appointments, diabetes care and prenatal 
procedures in the National Health System in Brazil. 

This is an ecological, retrospective, observational study using secondary data 
from several public databases, comprising all 5,564 Brazilian municipalities and with 
data from information systems in the National Public System (Sistema Único de Saúde - 
SUS). This equates to 99.9% of Brazil’s 5,570 municipalities. All of the data that 
comprised the study variables were extracted from secondary databases in the public 
domain, not therefore requiring approval from the Research Ethics Committee. Data 
collection was carried out by a single researcher in February 2021. 

The outcomes of the present study were the rate of medical procedures, with 
information 
available 
on 
the 
Outpatient 
Information 
System 
(SIA-SUS; 
http://sia.datasus.gov.br/principal/index.php). The procedures were categorized into 
three groups: a) Medical appointments (home appointments /care and medical 
appointments in Primary Health Care); b) Prenatal procedures (prenatal appointments of 
partner, prenatal appointments, puerperal appointments, fast-testing for HIV detection in 
the expectant mother or father/partner, fast-testing of pregnancy, fast-testing for syphilis 
in the expectant mother or father/partner), c) Diabetes care (diabetes treatment, diabetic 
foot examination, research into glucose in urine). We also calculated the total number of 
the abovementioned procedures. Thus, the absolute number of procedures per 10,000 
inhabitants was calculated monthly (February to December of 2018, 2019 and 2020) for 
each group. Estimates of inhabitants in 2019 were based on information provided by the 
Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE; http://www.ibge.gov.br) 

The exposure variable was the occurrence of the COVID-19 pandemic and seeks 
to estimate the impact of Sars-Cov-19 on the Public Health System in Brazil. The figure 
for the rate of procedures in the current pandemic (February to December 2020) was 
monthly, compared (to avoid seasonal variations) to the rate of procedures in the 
equivalent months in 2019 and 2018 (pre-pandemic). We are assuming that the first 
confirmed case of Sars-Covid-19 in Brazil occurred in February 2020. 

The confounding variable evaluated in the present study was the population size 
of municipalities, which was obtained from the Brazilian Institute of Geography and 
Statistics and categorized as a) ≤ 20,000 inhabitants; b) 20,001 to 50,000 inhabitants; c) 
50,001 to 150,000 inhabitants; d) > 150,000 inhabitants 11. Data relating to coverage by 
the Family Health Strategy and Oral Health Teams were collected monthly (Proportion 
-%) at the municipality level. They were obtained from the information and 
management of primary care databases and were categorized as follows: a) absent (0%); 
b) incipient (< 30%); c) intermediate (30 - 70%); and d) consolidated (≥ 70%). 
Municipalities with an HDI below 0.55 were classified as low HDI, between 0.55 and 
0.699 as average HDI, between 0.70 and 0.799 as high HDI and with HDI of 0.80 or 
more as very high. The Gini index (collected from the databases of the United Nations 
Development Program, http://www.atlasbrasil.org.br/2013/) was used continuously in 
the model. Brazil is geopolitically divided into five regions, namely: Southeast, South, 
Midwest, North and Northeast. The proportion of physicians and nurses per 10,000 
inhabitants for 2020 was collected from the National Register of Health Establishments 
(CNES), human resources section. Additionally, we calculated the rate of basic health 
units per 10,000 inhabitants. 

The 
analysis 
was 
performed 
using 
STATA 
16.0 
software 
(https://www.stata.com). Descriptive analysis was performed using mean rates, standard 
deviation, minimum, maximum and median of the variables. Multilevel mixed-effects 
negative binomial regression was used to analyze the association between the 
procedures and the impact of COVID-19, from February 2018 to December 2020. A 
stepwise backward procedure was used to select variables in the adjusted model. Only 
variables presenting a p-value < 0.250 were retained in the final model. Incidence rate 
ratios and 95% confidence intervals were estimated in the regressions. 

Of Brazil’s 5,570 municipalities, 99.9% were included in the present sample. 
Table 1 displays the description of the rates of procedures and the respective 
characteristics of the co-variables. The mean rate of medical appointment procedures 
per 10 thousand inhabitants/month, considering the period prior to the pandemic, was 
424.1 (SD 5,626.2) procedures and during the pandemic period, 232.7 (SD 1,471.3). 
The rate of prenatal procedures prior to the pandemic was 23.6 (SD 759.8) and 13.2 (SD 
650.6) for the period of the pandemic. 

Table 2 displays the incidence rate ratio of the monthly investigated procedures 
in accordance with the period of the pandemic and compared with the respective months 
in 2018 and 2019. Considering the total rate of procedures, a significant decrease was 
also observed in February (IRR = 0.60, CI 95% [0.55 – 0.64]); this decrease was even 
greater in March (IRR = 0.48, CI 95% [0.45 – 0.52]) and April (IRR = 0.27, CI 95% 
[0.25 – 0.29]); it remained significant throughout the period of assessment. 

A similar trend was observed for medical appointments, which fell by 36% in 
February (IRR = 0.64, CI 95% [0.57 – 0.72]) with the biggest reduction occurring in 
May (IRR = 0.27, CI 95% [0.24 – 0.30]), remaining significant until December. A 
steady decrease was also observed in prenatal procedures, starting with a reduction of 
36% in February. The reduction was less evident in June (IRR = 0.63, CI 95% [0.59 – 
0.66]) and September (IRR = 0.61, CI 95% [0.58 – 0.65]). On the other hand, the 
number of diabetes treatment procedures did not fall significantly in February (IRR = 
1.51, CI 95% [0.88 – 2.61]) or March (IRR = 0.58, CI 95% [0.33 – 1.01]), but saw the 
biggest decreases in April (IRR = 0.24, CI 95% [0.11 – 0.53]) and May (IRR = 0.19, CI 
95% [0.09 – 0.43]), all in 2020. After this period, the reduction was significant only in 
August (IRR = 0.61, CI 95% [0.38 – 0.99]) and December (IRR = 0.29, CI 95% [0.16 – 
0.54]). 

The findings showed a significant reduction in the availability of medical 
appointments and the performance of procedures involving prenatal and diabetes care 
between the periods compared. Considering the total number of procedures, all months 
(from February to December) witnessed a decrease in the rate of procedures. This may 
be explained by the large number of health professionals having been redeployed to 
combat the pandemic, not to mention that health professionals run a higher risk of 
contracting Sars-Covid-19 than the general public and, consequently, being unable to 
work.12 In addition, the fear of contamination has caused individuals to seek health 
services less frequently, especially in emergency situations. Thus, elective treatments 
have been postponed. 13 To corroborate this, no organized action by PHC to confront 
Covid-19 has been implemented at the national level in Brazil. Similarly, monitoring 
and control actions have not been directed towards people with health conditions that 
need assistance on an ongoing basis. These may be some of the reasons for the results 
observed in this study.12 

Emerging countries, like Brazil, still face an agenda that involves an 
epidemiological transition caused by an aging population and a triple burden of diseases 
or health conditions defined by acute health conditions (infectious diseases), external 
causes and health conditions that need continuous care, organized based on a strong 
PHC structure 14. PHC services in Brazil are still largely focused on addressing acute 
conditions and are largely inefficient in healthcare conditions that require continuous 
care. 15  

The significant decrease in PHC during the pandemic period under analysis may 
further compromise the population's health conditions. Continuous care during 
pregnancy - prenatal care - has been reported as a protective factor for maternal and 
child health 16, 17 and has been negatively affected during the entire pandemic period in 
2020. Outcomes for the increase in neonatal, postnatal and premature birth mortality 
have been associated with the purview of PHC  18. Moreover, hospital admissions for 
conditions within the ambit of PHC have been presented as a mark of effectiveness for 
these services 19, 20. These conditions are represented by an extensive list that includes 
chronic diseases and their complications. More specifically in Brazil, it has been 
possible to observe a significant reduction in hospitalizations due to care-sensitive 
conditions in recent years 21. However, a reduction in the rate of these improvements, as 
well as difficulties in the management of chronic diseases, has been pointed to as a 
major concern for PHC in the country 22.  

Among the health conditions that require continuous care, at the PHC level, 
prenatal care, diabetes and hypertension are prominent. In December 2019, the Ministry 
of Health launched a reform of the Brazilian PHC in order to improve access and 
efficiency in the sector 23. A set of indicators was presented, linked to payment for 
performance 23, 24 aimed at monitoring these conditions. However, due to an initial rule 
of transition between the different payment models and, subsequently, the declaration of 
a state of pandemic in the country, the resources linked to the Performance Pay Program 
(P4P) were guaranteed in their entirety, with the PHC being exempt from presenting the 
results of the indicators25. These factors already demonstrate the great difficulty of the 
Brazilian PHC model with the quality of the services provided. Data presented in this 
study corroborate the difficulty of achieving better results and the scenario presented by 
the pandemic is adding to this challenge 26.  

Controlled detachment causes numerous concerns in the world in terms of the 
potential unintended consequences for the interruption, or partial functioning, or change 
of focus of PHC services. The World Health Organization has observed a 75% 
reduction in services for non-communicable diseases such as diabetes and hypertension 
27. This reduction was more profound in lower-income countries 27. The aforementioned 
data reinforce the concern about a delayed treatment and monitoring agenda for patients 
who live in conditions that require continuous health care. Specifically, regarding the 
conditions addressed in this study (diabetes and prenatal), this postponed agenda may 
bring about an increase in mortality, infant mortality and disability in 2021. 

The WHO noted that the underlying causes for existing disruptions to non-
communicable disease services vary between income groups, with disruptions to 
transportation, insufficient personal protective equipment, insufficient staff, lack of 
inventory and availability of essential drugs and services that impact low- and middle-
income countries to a greater degree 27. The solutions pointed out by the authors 
permeate the adoption of patient screening models, the use of appropriate electronic 
records, expanded access to medical consultation through the use of telemedicine 
systems, development of specific protocols for the health care of specific non-
communicable diseases for the duration of the pandemic 28. Fundamentally, keeping 
strongly in mind the essential attributes of PHC: access, longitudinality, integrality and 
coordination of care. 

As regards the limitations of the present study, we used public secondary data 
from the Ministry of Health. In pandemic conditions, there may be a relaxation 
regarding the professionals' commitment to communicating and updating the data. Some 
important information regarding conditions of interest to the topic, such as 
hypertension, was not available. The data regarding the number of procedures are the 
only ones made available by the Ministry of Health at the municipal level. In ecological 
studies, although data do not directly measure quality and access to care, they can point 
to root problems in PHC services. Ecological designs also have the potential for 
systematic differences between areas in the measurement or recording of variables. The 
estimates do not indicate a causal effect, and inferences at the individual level cannot be 
made from the results of aggregate data, as it is not a causal interference study. 

This is the first study known to the authors which shows a reduction in prenatal 
procedures, diabetes and medical consultations in middle-income countries. This data is 
extremely important to alert the scientific community and managers about the 
postponed agenda for 2021. Studies with primary data or data that can point out the 
possible effects on mortality, infant mortality, drop in immunization and the 
development of disabilities, are fundamental for detailing this gap. Although the 
recording of procedures for actions directed towards chronic and prenatal diseases 
points to a reduction in actions, the formalization of new procedures such as 
Teleconsultation in Primary Care can benefit the reorganization of PHC services in the 
SUS, to reduce the repressed demand and mitigate a post-pandemic rebound effect 
resulting from the discontinuation of care. It is important that, in addition to PHC 
practices, the effect of the pandemic is monitored in relation to morbidity and mortality 
patterns in hospital services resulting from preventable causes in PHC, aiming to direct 
and restructure health practices even during the period of restrictive measures to combat 
COVID-19. 
