The behavior of Brazilian sports commentators during the 
recent COVID-19 pandemic is noteworthy. Day after day, 
despite social distancing, they continued their television 
broadcasts to help ease their viewers’ discomfort. For hours, 
they discussed past games, current problems and the future of 
the sport. At no time, however, did they make comments on 
topics outside of their area of expertise. Although they most 
certainly had an opinion on the seriousness of COVID-19, the 
merits of social distancing or use of medications popularized 
by many without scientific evidence, they restricted their 
commentary to their areas of expertise – sports! 

What has been hard to understand is the insistence of 
some physicians to provide opinions on unsubstantiated 
interventions for the treatment of COVID-19.  Some simply 
choose medical proselytism. Others may not appreciate the 
need for proper scientific investigation. Many prefer to omit 
themselves from any debate. However, the most perplexing 
type of attitude is simply a reactionary behavior related to the 
fear of the unknown that is, the combination of desperation 
and need to provide care for patients, and bombardment 
of information from social media may bias many doctors to 
embrace any potential redemptive treatment. Unfortunately, 
the only disease treated with this approach is the anxiety 
shared by doctors and their patients. 

In this bleak scenario full of uncertainties, mismatched 
information, lack of leadership, and a raging  torrent of 
assertions in social media can transform claims into truth 
(or at least into expectations), however absurd they may be. 
Unfortunately, disregarding strict scientific methods, using an 
alibi of trying to help, creates an atmosphere of confusion and 
increases the risk of those who implement such statements. 

The scientific and ethical rigor of research as a whole, and 
particularly in the medical field, has benefited thousands of 
patients around the world through careful research carried 
out under the guidance of the Declaration of Helsinki from 
1964. The basic principle of the Declaration is respect for 
the individuals (who must consent to participate in the 
research protocol), as the individual’s interests precede that 
of science and society. However, if the patient’s interest 
is imposed then one logically will ask how is it possible to 
justify randomization given the fears patients or physicians 
may have with the possibility of having “bad luck” and being 
allocated to a control group, perhaps a placebo, when the 
alternative is perceived to be a hope for cure? 

The answer to this question requires understanding and 
acceptance of the scientific method. Although several ideas 
appear effective during preliminary stages, only objective 
demonstration of efficacy beyond mere chance merits 
acceptance. In that regard, a control group is indispensable 
to achieve this as it allows determination of the benefit/risk 
ratio (“equipoise”) of the intervention. While participation 
in a control group may be met with disappointment from 
some patients and physicians, it must be remembered that 
individuals who participate in clinical trials in general do 
better than those who do not participate in such studies, even 
when allocated to control or placebo groups. Thus a logical 
and safe way to treat a patient when an answer to a clinical 
question is not available is to include them in a clinical trial 
as these patients will be offered the best possible treatment, 
under direct supervision, while advancing science. 

The history of medicine is full of examples of treatments 
considered by experts as “absolutely effective” that clinical 
trials proved to be futile and even harmful. In cardiology, 
cases of futility and harm are numerous and even striking. 
The use of antiarrhythmic drugs to prevent sudden death in 
patients with ventricular extrasystoles after acute myocardial 
infarction (AMI), magnesium to reduce the infarcted area and 
beta-blockers in vasovagal syncope are examples of the huge 
difference between expectation (perceived “common sense”) 
and the actual effect resulting in a therapeutic upheaval. 

In the current situation of COVID-19, supposedly 
miraculous therapies (including supratherapeutic doses 
of vitamins [C, D, and zinc], macrolides, chloroquine 
and its derivatives, corticosteroids, antivirals and other 
medications) have been tested in clinical trials for other 
viruses including  HIV, Ebola and H1N1 and, despite the 
expectations of efficacy in these conditions, none were 
shown to be safe or effective. While it may be assumed 
that the effect of some of these interventions might work 
differently in the current Covid pandemic, these beliefs will 
need to be evaluated with scientific rigor that the urgency 
and gravity of the situation entails. 

Unfortunately, most recommendations of interventions 
to fight COVID-19 are based in pseudo-evidence. The 
study that popularized hydroxychloroquine1 (the one cited 
by Donald Trump as having “a real chance to be one of 
the biggest game changers in the history of medicine”) is 
scientifically ludicrous. The authors of the study investigated 
whether patients with COVID-19 would have a better 
outcome with hydroxychloroquine. To that end, it would 
have been mandatory that two similar groups of patients 
would exist with only one receiving the drug. As simple as this 
seems, that is not what happened. In addition to the different 
drugs administered, the groups were from different hospitals, 
were of different ages, had different clinical conditions and 
received different additional treatments. Most notably, these 
patients had different viral loads. How is one to isolate the 
effect hydroxychloroquine when such marked differences are 
present? On top of that, four patients who died or went to the 
intensive care unit (ICU) who received hydroxychloroquine 
were eliminated from the results suggesting that for some 
investigators death may be less relevant than the detection 
of a virus in the nasopharynx. Finally, the sample size was 
very small not allowing any possible effect from the treatment 
to be defined. 

While it is disappointing when a study fails to answer 
the proposed question, it is worse when it creates social 
upheaval. This article was peer-reviewed by colleagues and 
by an editor who could have avoided consequences of this 
publication had they acted responsibly.  A pandemic does 
not justify forgetting science as mistakes create false hopes 
that may potentially put lives at risk. 

There has been variable interpretation of these data by the 
medical community throughout the world. Whereas many 
believe that the use of chloroquine is justifiable, that stance 
is far from unanimous. Many health care workers diagnosed 
with COVID-19 agreed to participate in randomized clinical 
trials to help create high-quality data that may potentially 
benefit thousands of people. It is remarkable that the medical 
community would band together as subjects in a clinical trial 
to generate data for a disease they are helping the public 
fight! This is the correct decision. Only properly designed 
and executed clinical studies conducted by professionals, 
hospitals and medical societies globally, and led by experts 
in clinical research, can offer accurate answers. The medical 
fraternity has a duty to free us from the setbacks created 
by the failure to understand scientific methods. “Common 
sense” and our collective mood cannot justify methodological 
errors which in turn may adversely impact thousands of lives. 
Physicians are expected to do what they best do - act in the 
light of ethics, pragmatically, based on the best that science 
can offer. Let us be genuine specialists when high-quality 
scientific data is available. After all, truth always prevails, 
and science is the tool that most rapidly draws us closer 
to it. As doctors and scientists, our role is to abate the gap 
between assumptions and reasoned conclusions as this will 
benefit patients and the population that yearns for answers 
provided by medical science. 

The authors would like to thank Dr. Andre Zimerman, Dr. 
Sheldon Singh (English version) and Mr. Julio Tude d’Avila 
for their critical suggestions and review of the manuscript
