(Morpho-physiological performance of Mikania glomerata Spreng. and Mikania 
laevigata Sch. Bip ex Baker plants under different light conditions). In tropical and subtropical 
zones, lianas play important roles in the process of ecological succession. This study aims to 
evaluate the photosynthetic and morpho-physiological performance between two lianas species 
from Mikania genus in response to different levels of radiation: full sun (I0), 25% (I25), 50% (I50), 
and 75% (I75) retention of solar radiation flux. Plants grown under I75 showed a reduced net 
photosynthetic rate (A). We observed dynamic photoinhibition at I0 during hours of high irradiation 
and temperature. The highest and lowest leaf chlorophyll content occurred at I75 and I0, 
respectively, while carotenoids/total chlorophyll and leaf thickness increased under I0. Total dry 
mass was higher in plants grown at I0 and I25. However, A values and biomass production of 
Mikania laevigata were higher at I25, while for Mikania glomerata greater biomass accumulation 
was observed between I0-I50. Therefore, we concluded that M. laevigata and M. glomerata have 
different morpho-physiological performances under same the radiation conditions. 

Lianas are life forms frequently found in tropical and subtropical forests (Gentry & Dodson 
1987) that explore all forest layers through different mechanisms of ascension, growth patterns, and 
physiological strategies (Schnitzer & Bongers 2002, Gerwing 2004, Kazda et al. 2009). Lianas 
stems are relatively thin and depends on external support to access the sunlight. Therefore, lianas 
species often allocate less carbon in stem growth, and more carbon in photosynthetic and vascular 
tissues (Putz 1984, Schnitzer 2005), leading to an advantage over trees due to higher growth rates 
(Zhu & Cao 2009). In addition, the ability to grow both laterally and vertically allows lianas to 
easily invade the canopy, extending long branches and reaching adequate light conditions 
(Schnitzer & Bongers 2002, Toledo et al. 2003). Since radiation requirements of lianas are high, 
those species are often classified as gap-dependent pioneer species, presenting a similar distribution 
pattern of pioneer tree species (Putz 1984, Schnitzer & Bonger 2002). However, some lianas are 
also able to germinate and grow in the understory (Nabe-Nielsen 2002, Sanches & Válio 2002, 
Schnitzer et al. 2012), suggesting some level of shade tolerance (Gerwing 2004). 

In the last decades, lianas abundance and productivity increased in tropical forests especially 
due to high rates of deforestation and human-induced climate change (Granados & Korner 2002, 
Phillips et al. 2002, Wright et al. 2004, Zhu et al. 2004, Schnitzer & Bongers 2011). In addition, 
evidences indicated that in mature and undisturbed forests the increased density of lianas may be 
consequence of changes in precipitation patterns (Schnitzer & Bongers 2011). Another important 
factor that influences lianas growth and distribution is light availability. For example, it is 
recognized that increased solar radiation improves lianas seedlings growth rates (Kurzel et al. 2006, 
Schnitzer & Bongers 2011). Furthermore, lianas may experience different amounts of radiation and 
spectral quality during growth. Therefore, it is expected a high phenotypic plasticity of lianas 
regarding photosynthetic and gas exchange adjustments in response to different light conditions 
(Bazzaz & Carlson 1982, Ribeiro et al. 2005). Stomatal opening level determines the trade-off 
between CO2 absorption and water loss by transpiration (Caemmerer & Baker 2007). The 
adaptative success under different light conditions depends on adjustments of leaf morphology, 
anatomy, and photosynthetic apparatus. Therefore, adjustments ensure greater efficiency in the 
conversion of radiant energy into carbohydrates to sustain plant growth (Dias-Filho 1997, Campos 
& Uchida 2002, Gratani 2014). 

Mikania glomerata Spreng. and Mikania laevigata Sch. Bip ex Baker are lianas species both 
native from Atlantic Forest in Brazil (Gasparetto et al. 2010). Mikania species belong to the 
Asteraceae family and are popularly known as "Guaco" and they both can benefit from Atlantic 
forest fragmentation. Within biodiversity hotspots around the world, the Atlantic forest is 
considered the most vulnerable ecosystem to deforestation and climate-change (Béllard et al. 2014). 
With a wide range of forest physiognomies (Myers et al. 2000, Ricketts et al. 2005, Metzger 2009), 
currently, only 28% of its original area remains (Rezende et al. 2018). Both species are similar 
regarding its morphology and are often indiscriminately used in traditional medicine to treat colds, 
flu, asthma, and, bronchitis because of the bronchodilator and expectorant properties (Moura et al. 
2002, Graça et al. 2007, Bolina et al. 2009, Gaspareto et al. 2010). Recent studies demonstrated that 
M. glomerata and M. laevigata have a different chemical composition and therapeutic properties 
(Melo & Sawaya 2015, Almeida et al. 2016, Costa et al. 2017). However, no reports of 
photosynthetic proprieties and gas exchange behavior under different light conditions between both 
species are found in the literature. 

Therefore, our objective was to evaluate the morpho-physiological performance of two 
Mikania species (Mikania glomerata and Mikania laevigata) under four different levels of retention 
of solar radiation flux: full sun (I0), and 25 (I25), 50 (I50), and 75% (I75). Our main hypothesis is 
that both Mikania species will be benefited from high radiation levels, resulting in enhanced 
photosynthesis and biomass production. 

Plant material and growth conditions - Experiments were carried out at the University of São Paulo 
at Ribeirão Preto campus (21° 10 '08.4'' 102 S and 47° 51' 50.6'' W), São Paulo, Brazil, which 
climate is tropical wet and dry (Aw) according to the Köppen-Geiger classification. For further 
details of climatic conditions during the experiment, see supplementary material table S1. We used 
the species Mikania glomerata Spreng. and Mikania laevigata Sch. Bip ex Baker. Mikania plantlets 
from each species were prepared cuttings from the middle of the branches of different parental 
plants of approximately 1 cm in diameter, 12 cm in length, a node at the top of the stake, and a pair 
of leaves (Lima et al. 2003). The plantlets were planted in 3-kg plastic bags containing a mixture of 
manure and soil (soil type redlatosol, 1:1) under greenhouse conditions. After rooting 
(approximately 60 days), the plants were transferred into 20 L pots containing soil and submitted to 
treatments for 150 days. The soil was fertilized with 1 g NPK (4-14-8) fertilizer per kg of soil. 
Plants were subjected to four light conditions: full sun condition (I0), and 25% (I25), 50% (I50), 
and 75% (I75) retention of solar radiation flux (supplementary figure 1). To achieve the planned 
levels of solar radiation, special greenhouses were constructed with artificial shading of varying 
degrees of retention of solar radiation flux. During the experiment, pots were irrigated daily and 
were maintained at soil field capacity, using a sensor ML2× Theta Probe (Delta-T Devices, 
Cambridge, UK). 

Gas exchange parameters, chlorophyll fluorescence, and photosynthetic pigment content 
were evaluated after 60, 90, 120, and 150 days after the treatments started (DAT). Leaf anatomy 
and biomass production were evaluated at 90 and 150 DAT. Three leaf samples per plant from 
upper, middle and lower canopy regions were collected. 

Gas exchange measurements - Net photosynthesis rate (A, µmol m-2 s-1), transpiration rate (E, mmol 
m-2 s-1), and stomatal conductance (gs, mol m-2 s-1) were evaluated daily from 8:00 to 11:00 hours in 
fully expanded leaves using an infrared gas analyzer model LCpro+ (ADC BioScientific, Ltd., UK). 
The measurements were made under ambient conditions of radiation, [CO2], and air temperature. 
The intrinsic water-use efficiency (iWUE; µmol mol-1) was estimated from gas exchange (A/gs) 
data. 

Chlorophyll fluorescence - The maximum quantum yield of primary photochemistry (Fv/Fm) was 
measured in three fully expanded leaves using a portable fluorometer model OS-3P (ADC 
BioScientific, UK). Leaves were dark-adapted for 30 minutes and used to measure the dark 
fluorescence yield (Fo), maximum fluorescence yield (Fm), and variable fluorescence (Fv). Then, 
Fv/Fm ratio was calculated. We performed four Fv/Fm diurnal courses from 6:00 hours to 18:00 
hours each two hours at 60, 90, 120, and 150 DAT. At sampling days, we monitored the relative 
humidity and ambient temperature using a hygro-thermometer, and the photosynthetic photon flux 
density (PPFD) using a quantum sensor connected to an irradiation meter model LI-250A (LI-COR, 
USA) (supplementary material figure S1). 

Photosynthetic pigment analysis - Photosynthetic pigments were extracted and quantified following 
the methodology of Hendry and Price (1993). Leaf discs (0.1g) were ground in 80% acetone, and 
the absorbance was measured at 480, 645, and 663 nm using a spectrophotometer model Genesys 
5Spectronic. Based on the absorbance value, the concentration of total chlorophyll and carotenoids 
were calculated. 

Leaf anatomy - Leaf fragments (1 cm²) were fixed in FAA 70% for 24 hours and dehydrated in 
ethanol series (Kraus & Arduin 1997). Then, samples were embedded in paraffin, cut in a 
microtome (8 μm), and stained with 1% toluidine blue. Samples were observed using a microscope 
QUIMIS (Q720 ED), photographed and the images were used to measure the leaf thickness, adaxial 
(AdE) and abaxial epidermis thickness (AbE), and palisade (PP) and spongy parenchyma (SP) 
thickness. Measurements were performed using the software AnatiQuanti 2.0 (Laboratory of Plant 
Anatomy/UFV). We found a hypodermic layer below the adaxial epidermis in both species, but 
since we did not found this tissue in all samples, it was not quantified. 

For the epidermis analysis, lower epidermis (hypoestomatic leaves) were detached from 
mesophyll using the Jeffrey solution (10% chromic acid and 10% nitric acid, 1:1). Samples were 
stained with safranin for 30 seconds and mounted in glycerin 50% (Kraus & Arduin 1997). Samples 
were observed using a microscope QUIMIS (Q720 ED) and photographed. We counted the number 
of epidermal cells and stomata and calculated the stomatal density (SD) and stomatal index (SI) 
using the software AnatiQuanti 2.0 (Laboratory of Plant Anatomy/UFV). 
Stomatal index (SI) was calculated according to the equation: <>, where: SN = stomata number; EC = number of epidermal cells 

Leaf area and biomass analysis - To measure leaf area (LA), we detached leaves from the whole 
plant and detached leaf discs of 1 cm2 from basal, median, and apical regions of the leaves. Using 
the disc area, disc dry weight, and total leaf dry weight, we estimated the mean leaf area. Specific 
leaf area (SLA) was estimated as the ratio of leaf area to leaf dry mass (dm2 g-1). 

For biomass, five plants from each treatment were collected. Samples were separated in 
roots, stems, petiole, and leaves. Then, plant material was dried at oven (70 °C) until constant mass. 
Subsequently, the dry weight of each organ was determined. 

Experimental design and statistical analysis - The effects of irradiance interference, species, and 
their interactions were evaluated using analysis of variance (two-way ANOVA) using the SYSTAT 
software package (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL) (P < 0.05 was accepted as statistically significant). 
Significant effects were further analyzed using Tukey's test. The ANOVA included two species (M. 
glomerata and M. laevigata) and four levels of sunlight retention of solar radiation flux treatment: 
0% (I0), 25% (I25), 50% (I50), and 75% (I75). 

Gas exchange - The solar radiation level significantly affected stomatal conductance (gs) and 
transpiration rate (E) regardless of species, except at 150 DAT (figure 1 a-d; ANOVA in 
supplementary material table S2). E and gs values were lower in plants grew under higher retention 
of solar radiation flux (I75). At 150 DAT, gs showed the lowest values when compared to previous 
samplings. When species were compared, gs was higher in M. laevigata than in M. glomerata 
(supplementary material table S2). 

Net photosynthetic rate (A) from both Mikania species was significantly affected by solar 
radiance levels and species. However, no interactions between factors were observed for A (figure 1 
e-f). Compared with plants grown under high solar radiances, a lower A was observed in plants 
grown under the greatest shading (I75) in both species (figures 1 e-f). At 150 DAT and under I75, A 
showed the lowest values and was 6.7 and 4.5-fold lower than plants under I25, in Mikania 
glomerata and Mikania laevigata, respectively. On average, in M. glomerata and M. laevigata, the 
highest A (12.69 and 14.87 µmol m-2 s-1, respectively) was observed in plants grown under I25 
compared with other treatments (figure 1 e-f). During the entire experiment, the lowest A and gs 
values were observed at 150 DAT, period with low air relative humidity, highest vapor pressure 
deficit (VPD), and increased air temperature (supplementary material table S3). 

Intrinsic water-use efficiency (iWUE) of M. glomerata plants grown at I75 was higher than 
at I0 (figure 1 g). However, in M. laevigata plants grew under I75, iWUE showed the lowest values 
when compared to other treatments (figure 1 h). Lower values of iWUE were observed in M. 
laevigata plants when compared with M. glomerata plants (supplementary material table S2). This 
result might reflect the increased gs observed in M. laevigata plants (figure 1 h). 

Diurnal courses of chlorophyll a fluorescence - In both species, and under high shading conditions 
(I75), Fv/Fm values were higher compared with all other treatments (figure 2). We observed that in 
both species at 60 and 90 DAT only plants developed under I0 showed a decreased Fv/Fm ratio, 
with values below 0.75, indicating the occurrence of dynamic photoinhibition (figure 2 a-d). At 120 
and 150 DAT, Fv/Fm reduction was observed under all treatments, except under I75 (figure 2 e-h). 
The recovery of this parameter was observed at 18:00 hours, except in M. glomerata plants grown 
under I0 and I25, and M. laevigata I0 (150 DAT), indicating a lower rate of recovery. In all 
treatments, the lowest Fv/Fm value was observed between 12:00 and 16:00 hours in plants grown 
under the full sun (figure 2). 

Photosynthetic pigments - The effects of retention of solar radiation flux on the photosynthetic 
pigments were similar in both species. There were significant effects of solar radiances and species 
on total chlorophyll and carotenoids for both species (figure 3; supplementary material table S2). 
Pigments concentration increased under low light availability. Plants grew under I0 showed a 
reduction in chlorophyll and carotenoids content during the experiment (figure 3 a-d). For M. 
glomerata, 5.6 and 4.0-fold more chlorophyll and carotenoids were found for I75 than I0 treatments 
at the end of the experiment (150 DAT) (figure 3 a, c). In M. laevigata plants, this difference was 
between 4.9 and 3.6-fold. In this same sampling, both species under I25 showed an average increase 
of 3-fold more chlorophyll and 2.5-fold more carotenoids than plants under I0 (figure 3 b, d). In 
both species, higher values of carotenoids/chlorophyll ratio were observed in plants grown in I0 
compared with plants grown under high levels of shading (I75) (figure 3 e, f). 

Leaf anatomy - The effects of retention of solar radiation flux on leaf anatomy were similar in both 
species. The thickness of the adaxial epidermis (AdE) and mesophyll (palisade and spongy 
parenchyma) decreased while the retention of solar radiation flux increased (table 1). The AdE was 
approximately 1.2 and 1.3-fold higher in I0 compared with I75 for M. glomerata and M. laevigata, 
respectively. Under I0, I25, and I50 the AdE was on average 1.4 and 1.7-fold higher in M. laevigata 
than M. glomerata at 90 and 150 DAT, respectively. Under I75, M. laevigata also showed a higher 
AdE. However, the values were 1.2 and 1.4-fold (90 and 150 DAT, respectively) higher than those 
observed in M. glomerata. Under I0 palisade and spongy parenchyma (150 DAT), were 10 and 17% 
higher in M. laevigata (table 1). 

Stomatal index (SI) and stomatal density (SD) both increased according to the increased 
levels of radiation (table 2). The highest SI and SD values were observed at 150 DAT for both 
species under I0 and I25. In M. glomerata grew under I0, SI and SD were 18.05% and 256 
stomata/mm2, respectively, while for M. laevigata developed under I0, SI and SD were 14.41% and 
176 stomata/mm2, respectively. Regardless of the solar radiances level, M. glomerata showed the 
highest values of SI and SD when compared to M. laevigata. 

Morphology and biomass partitioning - There was a significant effect of the retention of solar 
radiation flux and species for leaf area (LA). M. glomerata showed higher LA than M. laevigata at 
90 and 150 DAT (figure 4). At 90 DAT, LA of plants developed under I0 was 50% and 12% higher 
than plants grew under I75 for M. glomerata and M. laevigata, respectively (figure 4 a). At 150 
DAT, this difference was between 23% and 27%. In this same sampling, LA of M. glomerata 
developed under I0, I25, and I50 were 1.7-fold higher when compared to M. laevigata plants (figure 
4 b). The SLA decreased with increased levels of solar radiances (figure 4 c, d). In both species 
(150 DAT) developed under I75, SLA was on average 1.4-fold higher when compared to plants 
grown under I0, I25, and I50 (figure 4 d). 

The highest production of aboveground biomass was observed at 90 DAT in M. glomerata 
under I50 (45.37 g DW), and for M. laevigata under I0 (28.19 g DW) (figure 5 a). At 150 DAT, 
shoot biomass in M. glomerata was higher under I0, followed by plants grew under I25 and I50 
(figure 5 b). However, in M. laevigata plants, the highest aboveground dry mass was observed in 
plants developed under I25 followed by I0. At 90 and 150 DAT, we observed that under I0, root dry 
mass was higher compared to other treatments and independent of species (figure 5). Both species 
at 90 DAT showed higher leaf biomass production when compared to other part plants, however, at 
150 DAT, the stem biomass was higher than leaf dry mass (figure 5). At the end of the experiment 
(150 DAT), increased production of biomass was observed under I25 in M. laevigata compared 
with other solar radiances treatments. In M. laevigata, leaf, stem, and root biomass of plants grown 
under I75 were 38, 48, and 70%, respectively, lower when compared with plants grown under I25. 
Compared with full sun treatments (I0), root biomass showed a 54% and 69% reduction under I50 
and I75 treatments, respectively (figure 5). 

In M. glomerata plants, leaf and stem biomass were on average 40 and 48% higher under I0, 
I25, and I50 than under I75. Root biomass was 56, 40, and 70% higher under I0 when compared to 
plants grown under I25, I50, and I75, respectively. Moreover, we observed that M. glomerata plants 
grown under I0, I25, and I50 had greater leaves and stems biomass than those observed in M. 
laevigata plants (figure 5). 

In this study, we unraveled the main morpho-physiological characteristics of two tropical 
lianas species in response to light availability. Our main hypothesis was not corroborated, since 
Mikania glomerata showed a better growth performance under I0, I25, and I50, while Mikania 
laevigata showed improved performance under I25. Plants grown under I0 and I25 showed greater 
gs and E. The increased air temperature and VPD observed at 150 DAT presumably caused the 
reduction in gs, E, and A in both Mikania species. Stomatal closure under high light conditions 
combined with high temperature, and low relative humidity it is a mechanism that decreases the 
water loss rate to the environment, but it also decreases the CO2 influx into the leaves (Hsie et al. 
2015). Stomatal regulation is an advantageous strategy, especially during the dry season. Under 
field conditions, improved iWUE due to the reduction of gs and constant A values is the most 
effective mechanism for the continued growth of plants without experiencing dramatic water loss 
(Hanba et al. 2002). 

Our data indicated that M. glomerata and M. laevigata plants grown under conditions of 
retention of solar radiation flux of up to 50% had higher A than plants grown under I75. Lower A 
under I75 is presumably the result of a combination of many factors such as thinner leaves, low 
stomatal density, decreased gs, and low light intensity. These factors may result in lower 
intercellular CO2 concentration (Ci), Rubisco activity, and electron transporters (Lambers et al. 
1998). Notably, plants grown under I25 exhibited higher A values than plants grown under full 
sunlight (I0). This effect was observed in both species, suggesting that the irradiation growth 
condition was too high at I0, which potentially induced dynamic photoinhibition. Fv/Fm is a 
parameter that indicates photoinhibition level, and smaller values than 0.75 indicate photoinhibition 
with a concomitant reduction of the maximum quantum efficiency of PSII (Bolhàr-Nordenkampf & 
Öquist 1993). Under full sunlight conditions, the reduced Fv/Fm at noon and subsequent recovery 
at the end of the day is evidence of dynamic reversible photoinhibition (Bolhàr-Nordenkampf & 
Öquist 1993). The dynamic photoinhibition (inactivation of PSII) is an efficient defense mechanism 
because the increase in non-photochemical dissipation when the influx of CO2 is reduced (due to 
stomatal closure), prevents the formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and photooxidative 
damage (Choudhury & Behera 2001). 

Differences in the level of total chlorophyll, carotenoids, and carotenoids/chlorophyll ratio 
are reported between the sun and shade-adapted leaves from other species (Demmig-Adams 1998; 
Lichtenthaler & Babani 2004, Lichtenthaler et al. 2007). The increased accumulation of chlorophyll 
in Mikania plants grown in the shade reflects a compensation mechanism to increase the capture of 
light (Almeida et al. 2005). Chlorophyll is continuously synthesized and degraded (photo-
oxidation) in the presence of light, but under conditions of high light intensity, the chlorophyll 
molecules are more likely to be photo-oxidized, and a balance is established under lower levels of 
irradiation (Kramer & Kozlowski 1979). The decreases of chlorophyll content and Fv/Fm values are 
indicators of oxidative stress, as we observed in plants developed under I0. However, in M. 
laevigata grew under I25 and I50, the lowest chlorophyll content compared to M. glomerata may 
help in photoprotection due to the reduced light interception, resulting in higher Fv/Fm in this 
species (Munné-Bosch & Alegra 2000). 

High carotenoids levels under high light conditions are an essential mechanism for 
photoprotection since it prevents photooxidative damage of chloroplast pigments and avoids the 
formation of singlet oxygen (Demmig-Adams & Adams 1992, Yamamoto & Bassi 1996, Gonçalves 
et al. 2001). The total number of molecules of carotenoid per chlorophyll molecule is typically 
higher in leaves grown in high irradiation environments when compared with leaves of shaded 
plants, which is in agreement with our results. 

In addition to the increased chlorophyll content under shaded conditions, morphological 
alterations such as higher LA and SLA help plants in light interception process under shaded 
environments, as observed in Mikania plants under I75 (Artru 2018). In plants developed under I0, 
the SLA reduction enhance the protection and buffer the damages of excessive solar radiance may 
cause (Givnish et al. 2004, Matos et al. 2009, Wentworth et al. 2006). The small and dense leaves 
of plants developed under full sunlight is a morphological mechanism in order to avoid excessive 
water losses and protection of photosynthetic apparatus against possible photo-oxidative damages 
caused by excessive solar radiances (Lima Junior et al. 2005). 

Lowest SLA values indicate an increased leaf thickness as a result of thicker parenchyma 
and epidermis under high solar radiances levels. In M. laevigata plants, we observed a higher leaf 
thickness compared to M. glomerata. This increment in leaf thickness, mainly due to a thicker 
adaxial epidermis may explain the reduced photoinhibition and higher photosynthesis in plants 
developed under I25. Epidermis attenuates the UV radiation and allows photosynthetically active 
radiation (PAR) to diffuse into photosynthetic tissues. For example, Verdaguer et al. (2017) found a 
thicker adaxial epidermis in plants stimulated by UV-A radiation. The development of a thicker 
adaxial epidermis, or hypoderm, seems to be a mechanism of protection of palisade parenchyma 
against the excessive visible light and a protection against leaf wilting when the plant is exposed to 
high solar radiances levels (Chazdon & Kaufmann 1993). Changes in leaf structure are crucial for 
plant growth under different environmental conditions (Hanba et al. 2002, Schlüter et al. 2003). The 
SD and SI in Mikania leaves were also affected by solar radiances levels. The synchronized 
increases in SD and SI indicated that solar radiances levels stimulated the process of epidermal cell 
differentiation in stomata and that SD and SI alterations were not caused by reductions in the size or 
number of epidermal cells (Woodward 1987). The increased SD and SI in plants with the lowest 
retention of solar radiation flux presumably resulted in an increased gs and A. 

In this study, we observed higher dry matter production under high solar radiances levels in 
both Mikania species. Similar results were observed in other lianas species, such as Acacia 
kamerunensis, Loeseneriella rowlandii, and Afrobrunnichia erecta (Toledo-Aceves & Swaine 
2008), and Plukenetia volubilis (Cai 2011). Increased biomass accumulation highly depends on the 
transport of photoassimilates between organs, and patterns of cell division and cell expansion. In 
this study, high light levels induced A, presumably increasing the production of carbohydrates and 
dry matter. Our data showed that plants developed under low light availability conditions allocated 
a greater amount of assimilates to aerial organs in order to reach the light at the upper canopy layer, 
optimizing the photosynthetic process within an environment where low light might limit 
photosynthesis (Thompson et al. 1992, Walters et al. 1993). Leaf biomass in both Mikania species 
was higher in plants grown under higher light conditions, contradicting the results of Boeger et al. 
(2009), where authors showed that shading stimulated greater leaf biomass production in M. 
glomerata. In this study, we also observed higher root biomass at full sunlight conditions in both 
species. This response presumably allows greater absorption of water and nutrients, which may 
represent a strategy to increase the ability to withstand higher rates of photosynthesis and 
transpiration in bright environments (Poorter 2001, Mielke & Schaffer 2010). 

Our data showed that plants developed under low light intensity showed an increased 
content of chlorophyll, LA, and SLA. However, A was small when compared to other treatments, 
presumably resulting in less aboveground dry mass. In both Mikania species, plants developed 
under shaded environments (I75) showed lower performance than plants grown in other 
environments. Plants grown under I25 presented higher photosynthesis values than plants grown 
under I0, and this response may be associated with an increased amount of chlorophyll. Although 
both species are morphologically similar, M. glomerata and M. laevigata showed distinct responses 
to irradiance levels. M. glomerata had great biomass production under I0, I25, and I50 with low 
variation regarding photosynthetic rates. While in M. laevigata plants, the highest photosynthesis 
rate was observed under I25 and I50, while biomass production was higher under I25. In this 
species we also observed a higher investment in root growth under higher solar radiances levels (I0 
e I25), resulting in a decreased aboveground biomass when compared to M. glomerata. While M. 
glomerata showed higher SI, SD, LA, and SLA, M. laevigata showed a thicker leaf. In addition to a 
thicker leaf, caused especially by an increased AdE, the lower chlorophyll content and higher 
photosynthesis rate observed under I25 and I50 presumably contributed to the reduced 
photoinibitory effects (Fv/Fm) in this species when compared to M. glomerata, under the same solar 
radiances level. 

We concluded that M. laevigata showed better performance under 25% of retention of solar 
radiation flux, and not under full sun, contradicting our main hypothesis. We also concluded that 
plants of both Mikania species show a low capacity of growing under shading conditions. However, 
under shading both species invested more in shoot biomass, a strategy presumably associate with 
enhanced growth to reach the canopy more quickly. Although lianas are known as light-dependent 
plants, the two species presented different responses under the same irradiance conditions. M. 
laevigata showed better growth under shading of 25% irradiation interference, while M. glomerata 
grows better from 0 to 50% irradiation interference. 

This study was financed in part by the Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível 
Superior - Brasil (CAPES) - Finance Code 001. 
