In face of the pandemic of the novel coronavirus disease 
2019 (COVID-19), the management of patients with 
cardiovascular risk factors and/or disease is challenging. 
The cardiovascular complications evidenced in patients 
with COVID-19 derive from several mechanisms, ranging 
from direct viral injury to complications secondary to the 
inflammatory and thrombotic responses to the infection. 
The proper care of patients with COVID-19 requires 
special attention to the cardiovascular system aimed at 
better outcomes.

Currently the world faces the pandemic of the novel 
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), which emerged in 
December 2019 in the city of Wuhan, province of Hubei, in 
China.1,2 The initial cases were described as pneumonia that 
rapidly progressed to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).

This novel virus, named severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), is the seventh coronavirus 
identified so far and differs from the other coronaviruses that 
cause common cold and mild pneumonia (229E, OC43, 
NL63 and HKU1). The SARS-CoV-2 is similar to the severe 
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) and the 
Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), 
responsible for the infections occurring in China in 2002-
2003 and in the Middle East in 2012, respectively.1,2 Despite 
the phylogenetic similarities between SARS-CoV-2 and the 
zoonotic coronaviruses that caused SARS and MERS, the 
SARS-CoV-2 spread is much higher, contributing to an infection 
dissemination ten times faster than that of the SARS-CoV.2-4 The 
basic reproduction number (R0) of COVID-19 is 2.78, meaning 
that, on average, each individual infected can transmit the 
disease to three others.5 A study recently published in Science 
has stated, by use of a mathematical model, that 85% of the 
COVID-19 transmissions occur from asymptomatic individuals.6

Because of its fast dissemination, COVID-19 was declared 
a pandemic by the World Health Organization (WHO) on 
March 11, 2020.4 At the current time, COVID-19 affects more 
than 181 countries and the number of cases keeps increasing 
exponentially.  Up to April 2, 2020, 1,015,403 cases and 53,030 
deaths had been registered around the world, yielding a lethality 
of 5.2%. Up to that same date, 8,044 confirmed cases and 324 
deaths had been registered in Brazil, with a mortality of 4%. 
Initial Brazilian data have shown 90% of the deaths occurring 
among individuals aged over 60 years and 84% of the patients 
with at least one comorbidity, 51% with cardiovascular disease 
(CVD) and 37.7% with diabetes.7

The analysis of 44,672 confirmed cases of COVID-19 in 
Wuhan has evidenced an overall case-fatality rate of 2.3%; 
however, among those with preexisting comorbidities, the case-
fatality rate was higher: 10.5% for CVD, 7.3% for diabetes and 
6% for hypertension.8 In addition, cardiovascular complications 
due to COVID-19, such as myocardial injury (20% of the cases), 
arrhythmias (16%), myocarditis (10%), heart failure (HF) and 
shock (up to 5% of the cases), have been reported.9-11

This review was aimed at aiding healthcare professionals 
(clinicians, emergencists, cardiologists and intensivists) 
involved in the care of patients with COVID-19, proposing an 
algorithm of cardiovascular assessment for the early detection 
of complications, in addition to recommending protocols to 
treat cardiovascular complications in those patients.

Recent data of the COVID-19 pandemic have shown that 
the virus can affect the cardiovascular system with several 
manifestations, such as myocardial injury, HF, Takotsubo 
syndrome (TS), arrhythmias, myocarditis and shock.4,11-14 
The damage due to COVID-19 to the cardiovascular system 
is probably multifactorial and can result from an imbalance 
between high metabolic demand and low cardiac reserve, 
systemic inflammation and thrombogenesis, in addition 
to direct cardiac damage from the virus.13 This damage to 
the cardiovascular system occurs mainly in patients with 
cardiovascular risk factors (advanced age, hypertension and 
diabetes) or preexisting CVD.10,11 Figure 1 summarizes the 
inflammatory response to the viral infection, which leads to 
damage to the cardiovascular system and lungs, with elevation 
in the levels of d-dimer, procalcitonin, C-reactive protein, 
ferritin, troponin and NT-proBNP, culminating in cardiovascular 
complications and death. 

The systemic inflammatory response to SARS-CoV-2 is 
accompanied by higher concentrations of cytokines related to 
injury to the cardiovascular system.15 The increase in troponin 
levels is accompanied by an elevation in other inflammatory 
markers, such as d-dimer, ferritin, interleukin 6 (IL-6), lactate 
dehydrogenase (LDH), C-reactive protein, procalcitonin and 
leukocyte count.1,11 Zhou et al. have shown higher levels of 
d-dimer, IL-6, ferritin and LDH, as well as lymphopenia, in 
patients who died, suggesting that those inflammatory markers 
might have prognostic implications. A d-dimer level at admission 
greater than 1µg/mL was an independent predictor of mortality 
in that population.12 In addition to elevated inflammatory 
markers, patients with COVID-19 show increased BNP or NT-
proBNP levels, markers of myocardial dysfunction. Patients with 
myocardial injury showed higher NT-proBNP levels, with positive 
linear correlation.10,11 This finding reinforces that those with 
myocardial injury are prone to cardiac function impairment.10

A meta-analysis with four studies, including 341 COVID-19 
patients, has reported significantly higher troponin I levels in 
patients with severe disease as compared to those with non-
severe disease.16 Patients with myocardial injury more often 
required admission to the intensive care unit (ICU) (22.2% 
vs. 2.0%), had a higher incidence of HF (52% vs 12%) and 
a higher death rate (59% vs. 1%).1,9 Shi et al., assessing 416 
hospitalized patients with COVID-19, have reported that 
myocardial injury, defined as troponin levels above the 99th-
percentile upper reference limit, is a frequent complication 
(19.7%) in those patients, being associated with increased 
mortality and ARDS.11 On multivariate analysis, myocardial 
injury and ARDS were independent predictors of mortality (HR 
4.26 and 7.89, respectively).11 In a recent study, Guo et al. have 
reported elevated troponin levels in 27.8% of 187 patients with 
COVID-19. Among patients without CVD and with normal 
troponin levels, mortality was 7.6%; among patients with CVD 
and normal troponin levels, mortality was 13.3%; among patients 
without CVD and with elevated troponin levels, mortality was 
37.5%; and among patients with CVD and elevated troponin 
levels, mortality was 69.4%. There was a strong correlation 
between high troponin levels and increased C-reactive protein 
and NT-proBNP levels. Patients with increased troponin levels 
had a higher incidence of ventricular arrhythmias and higher 
need for mechanical ventilation.10

Cardiovascular complications, such as HF, myocarditis, 
acute myocardial infarction, shock and arrhythmias, are also 
frequent in patients with myocardial injury. In a cohort with 
150 patients, 7% of them developed irreversible myocardial 
damage and HF, associated with significant elevations in 
troponin levels.17 Malignant arrhythmias (ventricular tachycardia 
with degeneration to ventricular fibrillation or hemodynamic 
instability) have been most frequently observed in individuals 
with troponin elevation (11.5% vs 5.2%).10 Patients with severe 
COVID-19 can rapidly develop important cardiovascular 
impairment, shock and failure of multiple organs. In two 
Chinese cohorts of hospitalized patients with COVID-19, up 
to 20% developed the severe form of disease with shock.9,12 

Myocarditis can be related to acute HF in patients with 
COVID-19. Cases of COVID-19-related myocarditis have 
been described, with fulminant myocarditis, rapid progression 
and significant ventricular dysfunction, associated with diffuse 
myocardial edema. Those patients had electrocardiographic 
changes and troponin elevation.14,18,19 Although TS has not 
been directly linked to COVID-19, some cases of ventricular 
dysfunction in COVID-19 patients might be attributed to that 
syndrome, which is a frequent complication in individuals with 
exacerbated systemic inflammatory response, in whom the stress 
and severity of the viral infection trigger the TS.20

Some studies have suggested that the damage to the 
cardiovascular system secondary to SARS-CoV-2 can be 
linked to the angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 (ACE2),13,15 
which is related to the immune system and present in high 
concentration in the lungs and heart. The ACE2 down-
regulates the angiotensin-renin system by inactivating 
angiotensin-2, and ACE2 might have a protective role 
against the development of respiratory failure and its 
progression.  SARS-CoV-2 has four main structural proteins:  
spike (S), nucleocapsid (N), membrane (M), and envelope 
(E) proteins. The coronavirus spike protein binds to the 
ACE2 receptor and the virus enters the host cell (Figure 2), 
where ACE2 inactivation occurs, favoring pulmonary 
damage. Because of the high ACE2 concentrations in the 
heart, potentially severe damage to the cardiovascular 
system can occur.13,21 

Patients with preexisting CVD apparently have increased 
serum levels of ACE2, which might contribute to the more 
severe manifestations in that population.22-24 Similarly, 
individuals with hypertension would have a higher ACE2 
expression secondary to the use of angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitors (ACEI) or angiotensin II receptor blockers 
(ARB), which would potentially increase the susceptibility 
to SARS-CoV-2 infection.4 However, current studies on 
humans have some limitations: a) assessment of a small 
number of individuals using those drugs, and b) the advanced 
age of a large part of the patients assessed, which is an 
important confounder, because advanced age increases 
the susceptibility to infection and is the major factor of 
poor prognosis.25 

It is worth noting that, despite substantial structural 
homology between ACE2 and ACE, their enzyme active 
sites are distinct, and, as a result, ACE inhibitors in clinical 
use do not directly affect ACE2 activity. In addition, that 
enzyme plays a well-known role in the recovery of ventricular 
function of patients with myocardial injury, because it inhibits 
angiotensin II activity.26 On the other hand, angiotensin II 
has been suggested to account for the cardiac injury by 
the coronavirus, and the administration of recombinant 
ACE2 would normalize angiotensin II levels. Studies with 
recombinant ACE2 and losartan are being conducted.25  

The current recommendation is that ACEI and ARB 
should be continued in patients on regular use of those 
drugs, because of the clear benefit of blood pressure control 
and mortality decrease in those with HF, as evidenced in 
randomized studies.27,28 In the severe forms of COVID-19, 
hemodynamic stability and renal function should be 
assessed individually before deciding on the continuation 
or withdrawal of the drugs. 

Patients with cardiovascular risk factors (advanced 
age, hypertension and diabetes), as well as those with 
CVD (coronary artery disease, cardiomyopathies and 
cerebrovascular disease), have susceptibility to the severe 
form of COVID-19 and cardiovascular complications, being 
classified as a risk group. Approximately 80% of the patients 
with the severe form of COVID-19 have a comorbidity.29 
Table 1 summarizes the major studies that characterize the 
clinical comorbidities of patients with COVID-19.9-12,17,29-32 

A recent meta-analysis including eight studies from 
China, with 46,248 infected individuals, has shown that the 
most prevalent comorbidities were hypertension (17 ± 7%), 
diabetes mellitus (8 ± 6%) and CVD (5 ± 4%). Wang et al., 
assessing only hospitalized patients with COVID-19, have 
reported a higher prevalence of hypertension (31.2%), CVD 
(19.6%) and diabetes (10.1%),9 emphasizing that individuals 
with those comorbidities have the most severe form of 
COVID-19, usually requiring hospitalization. These patients 
more often had hypoxemia and need for ICU admission.9,30 
Likewise, advanced age is related to the severe form of 
disease. In those studies, the median age has ranged from 
42 to 64 years,11,30 being higher in severely ill patients (64 
vs 51.5).29 In addition, patients admitted to ICU and those 
with hypoxemia were older.9,30

Cardiovascular complications were also frequent among 
patients from the risk group. Those with CVD had troponin 
elevation and higher rates of shock and arrhythmias.10-12 
Guo et al., assessing a cohort with 187 patients, have 
observed that those with myocardial injury had a high 
prevalence of hypertension (63%vs 28%), diabetes (30.8% 
vs 8.9%), coronary artery disease (32.7% vs 3%) and HF 
(15.4% vs 0%), and were older (median age, 71.4 years).10 

In a cohort of 191 patients, Zhou et al. have assessed the 
characteristics of the deceased ones as compared to those of 
the discharged ones. In that cohort, the deceased patients 
had a higher prevalence of hypertension (48%), diabetes 
(31%) and CVD (24%). Advanced age was an independent 
predictor of mortality.12 Mortality rate increases with 
increasing age as follows: 1.3% in patients aged 50-59 years; 
3.6% in patients aged 60-69 years; 8% in patients aged 70-
79 years; and 14.8% in patients aged 80 years and older.31 
Population studies have reported an overall mortality rate 
of 6% in patients with hypertension, 7.3% in patients with 
diabetes and 10.5% in patients with CVD.33 

Patients with cancer have a higher risk for COVID-19 
because of their impaired defense and their sequelae 
from the antineoplastic treatment. In China, among the 
confirmed cases of COVID-19, the prevalence of cancer 
has ranged from 1% to 7%, which is higher than the overall 
incidence of cancer in that country (0.2% - 201.7/100,000 
individuals).2,10,34 Patients with cancer more often developed 
the severe form of COVID-19 as compared to those without 
cancer (39% vs 8%).35 Of the patients with cancer submitted 
to recent chemotherapy or surgery, 75% developed severe 
disease as compared to 43% of those with no recent 
treatment.35 

Although not formally, cardiovascular assessment of 
patients with suspected or confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection 
is recommended in the following situations: a) preexisting 
CVD or cardiovascular risk factors; b) cardiovascular signs and 
symptoms (dyspnea, shock, chest pain, electrocardiographic 
alterations or increased cardiac area); c) alterations on 
biomarkers, such as d-dimer, troponin, NT-proBNP and 
ferritin; and d) need for hospitalization. Those with CVD 
are prone to experience myocardial injury after SARS-CoV-2 
infection, in addition to being at a higher risk of death.10 
Cardiologists should be part of the team caring for critical 
patients, aiding in clinical discussions and treatment. 

The initial cardiovascular assessment should comprise 
clinical history, physical examination, troponin levels, and 
electrocardiogram (ECG). Troponin levels above the 99th-
percentile upper reference limit and acute alterations on ECG 
support the identification of patients at higher cardiovascular 
risk and might contribute to the decision making on hospital 
admission and case management. Figure 3 shows the 
flowchart for cardiovascular assessment in COVID-19 cases.

The ECG can identify malignant cardiac arrhythmias, 
defined as sustained ventricular tachycardia inducing 
hemodynamic instability or ventricular fibrillation. Alterations 
in repolarization suggesting acute ischemia have been 
reported, mainly in patients with myocarditis.14,18 

The ECG plays an important role in the QTc interval 
monitoring of patients on hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) and 
azithromycin. Both drugs have been linked to QT interval 
prolongation. The combination of both drugs and the 
presence of fluid and electrolyte imbalance in patients with 
COVID-19 require QTc interval monitoring. In-patients should 
undergo an ECG 2-3 hours after the second dose of HCQ 
and daily thereafter. If QTc increases by >60ms or absolute 
QTc >500ms (or >530-550ms if QRS >120ms), azithromycin 
should be discontinued or the HCQ dose, reduced, and ECG 
performed daily. If the ECG changes remain, the risk/benefit 
of maintaining the medication should be reevaluated. For 
outpatients, who may be less at risk for complications from 
QT interval prolongation, baseline ECG should be acquired 
2-3 hours after initiating HCQ and on day 3 of therapy. If QTc 
increases by >30-60ms or absolute QTc >500ms (or >530-
550ms if QRS >120ms), consider discontinuing therapy.36 

Transthoracic echocardiogram should be the initial choice 
for assessing cardiac function in those patients, and ideally 
performed at the emergency department by use of the point-
of-care or dynamic method. Transthoracic echocardiogram 
can show systolic and/or diastolic left ventricular impairment 
and provides hemodynamic information to support the 
management of patients, in addition to enabling the diagnosis 
of pericardial changes. It should be considered for all risk 
groups or those requiring hospitalization. Patients with 
ventricular dysfunction are more likely to need mechanical 
ventilation and be of worse prognosis.13 Critical patients should 
be followed up with daily echocardiogram, as well as strict 
assessment of hemodynamic parameters and biventricular 
function. In addition, the detection of ventricular dysfunction 
is an indication for invasive hemodynamic monitoring and will 
guide the treatment with inotropic and/or circulatory support. 
In critical cases, dynamic echocardiogram should be acquired 
daily and at every hemodynamic change.

Magnetic resonance imaging should be considered in 
stable patients and can support the differential diagnosis 
of ventricular dysfunction etiology, which might be related 
to myocarditis or stress-induced systolic dysfunction. The 
diagnosis of myocarditis follows the classic criteria already 
validated for other viral etiologies, in which myocardial 
edema and non-ischemic myocardial late enhancement can 
be observed.37-39

Initial approach and intensive support. The mean time 
of symptom onset is 4-5 days, and 97.5% of contaminated 
individuals will have symptoms in up to 11.5 days from 
exposure.32 Most patients (81%) have mild symptoms, the 
most common being fever (88%) and cough (67.7%). Other 
less frequent are diarrhea, myalgia, headache and runny nose. 
Approximately 20% of the patients with COVID-19 will have 
the severe form, with dyspnea, tachypnea, oxygen saturation 
≤93%, and pulmonary infiltrate, while 5% will have the critical 
form of COVID-19, with signs of shock and respiratory failure.1,40 
Most of asymptomatic or olygosymptomatic clinically stable 
patients require no hospitalization, which is mandatory for those 
with severe symptoms and unfavorable evolution. 

The initial assessment of patients with COVID-19 should 
include: ECG, arterial blood gas analysis with lactate level, 
d-dimer, complete blood count, kidney and liver function tests, 
clotting factors, troponin, creatine phosphokinase, ferritin, 
LDH, IL-6 and electrolytes (sodium, magnesium, potassium, 
and calcium). Chest radiography should be performed and 
chest computed tomography (CT) considered in some cases. 
Computed tomography evidences abnormalities in 85% of 
the patients, and 75% of them show bilateral pulmonary 
involvement, commonly characterized as ground-glass 
opacifications and subpleural and peripheral consolidations.41 
Those with indication for hospitalization should undergo 
echocardiography in the emergency department or within 
the first hours from hospital admission.

The clinical course of COVID-19 is variable and potentially 
severe, because 3.4% of the patients progress to ARDS,32 a 
proportion that increases in the cohorts of those hospitalized 
with the disease (19.6%) and among those with myocardial 
injury (58.5%).9,11 Acute respiratory distress syndrome is 
defined based on the Berlin criteria: acute onset of pulmonary 
damage, bilateral pulmonary opacities on chest radiography, 
and pulmonary edema. The ARDS Berlin Definition stratifies 
the severity of pulmonary damage based on the relation 
between partial pressure of arterial oxygen (PaO2) and fraction 
of inspired oxygen (FiO2), acquired in a positive-end expiratory 
pressure (PEEP) or continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) 
≥ 5 cm H2O. The ARDS is considered severe when PaO2/
FiO2 is <100.42 

Mechanical ventilation is recommended in the presence 
of hypoxemia despite oxygen supply. Protective mechanical 
ventilation strategies should be used, with tidal volume of 6 
mL/kg, plateau pressure < 30 cm H2O, and PEEP adjusted 
according to FiO2. Patients usually have good pulmonary 
compliance despite severe hypoxemia.  For patients with 
ARDS and PaO2/FiO2 ≤ 150, prone position should be 
considered, and, in case of significant patient-ventilator 
dyssynchrony, neuromuscular block can be performed.43

Hemodynamic monitoring should be cogitated in all ICU 
patients with signs of shock. Minimally invasive hemodynamic 
monitoring and continuous cardiac output monitoring should 
be considered in association with dynamic echocardiography 
and analysis of tissue hypoperfusion markers, such as clinical 
parameters, arterial lactate levels, deltaPCO2, and base excess. 
In the presence of shock, norepinephrine is the drug of choice, 
and the addition of vasopressin is recommended if increasing 
doses of noradrenaline are necessary for hemodynamic 
optimization.44 If cardiac dysfunction occurs, dobutamine 
should be added.44 Norepinephrine should be immediately 
initiated, even in a peripheral access, preventing prolonged 
hypotension, which yields high mortality.

Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) might be 
necessary for patients with acute respiratory failure refractory 
to initial measures.45,46 At first, venovenous ECMO is indicated 
for recovery of pulmonary function.46,47 When associated with 
significant cardiovascular impairment in patients with severe 
ventricular dysfunction and/or cardiogenic shock, venoarterial 
ECMO might be considered.48 ECMO should be initiated 
before the installation of failure of multiple organs.49 

Specific treatment. At the present time, the treatment of 
critically ill patients is based on supportive measures for organic 
dysfunctions. Since the beginning of the pandemic, an effective 
antiviral treatment for COVID-19 has been sought. In China 
and Italy, in severe cases and in an individualized manner 
depending on the institution, drugs like chloroquine (CQ) or 
HCQ, lopinavir/ritonavir, remdesivir and favipiravir have been 
used. Remdesivir and favipiravir are broad-spectrum antiviral 
agents, whose efficacy and safety for the management of 
patients with COVID-19 are being assessed in randomized 
clinical trials.50 A recent randomized and controlled study 
has shown that the lopinavir/ritonavir combination, used in 
the management of HIV infection, is ineffective against the 
SARS-CoV-2 infection.50

Chloroquine diphosphate and HCQ sulfate are well-known 
useful drugs to treat malaria and autoimmune diseases, such 
as rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus. In 
experimental studies, CQ and HCQ have shown to act against 
SARS-CoV-2, by interfering with ACE2 glycosylation, thus 
reducing the efficiency of the binding between ACE2 of host 
cells and the coronavirus surface protein. In addition, those 
drugs act by increasing the pH of endosomes and lysosomes, 
thus preventing virus/host cell fusion and subsequent viral 
replication. Moreover, HCQ prevents the presentation of 
viral antigens to T cells and inhibits the transcription of 
proinflammatory genes, hindering the release of cytokines. 
Thus, in experimental studies, CQ and HCQ have prevented 
viral entry into the cell and replication, as well as attenuated 
the inflammatory response. In China, a study has shown that 
CQ was linked to a higher percentage of clinical and virological 
cure, being then adopted for the treatment of COVID-19 in 
that country. A small study has reported that HCQ, regardless 
of combination with azithromycin, reduced the SARS-CoV-2 
RNA detection on respiratory tract swab samples, but that 
study has not assessed clinical outcomes.51-53

The major side effects of CQ and HCQ are gastrointestinal 
intolerance (nauseas and vomit) and, in the long-term use, 
retinopathy, maculopathy and cardiomyopathy. Other 
common side effects of those drugs are total atrioventricular 
block, bundle-branch block, cardiac arrhythmias, hypotension, 
torsades de pointes, T-wave inversion, ventricular fibrillation, 
and ventricular tachycardia, which are even more frequent 
with their prolonged use and in the presence of liver and 
kidney dysfunction. On March 10, 2020, the Journal of Critical 
Care has published a systematic review on the efficacy and 
safety of CQ for the treatment of COVID-19, including one 
narrative letter, expert consensus paper, one editorial, one 
in-vitro study, two national guideline documents, and the 
description of 23 ongoing clinical trials in China.54 On March 
21, 2020, the president of the United States urged the FDA to 
quickly approve CQ and HCQ for the treatment of COVID-19. 
However, the FDA currently recommends the compassionate 
drug use until scientific evidence on the efficacy of CQ, HCQ 
and azithromycin for the treatment of COVID-19 is available.

On March 23, 2020, two studies conducted in Brazil were 
approved by the Brazilian Committee on Ethics in Research 
(CONEP): a) a phase IIb study to assess the efficacy and safety 
of CQ diphosphate in the treatment of patients hospitalized 
with SARS-CoV-2: a double-blind, randomized, clinical 
trial – a multicenter study with 440 patients proposed by the 
Teaching and Research Board of Fiocruz Amazonas – that has 
included 50 patients so far; and b) an assessment of the safety 
and clinical efficacy of HCQ in association with azithromycin 
for patients with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia – a multicenter study 
with 400 patients proposed by the Brazilian Israeli Beneficent 
Society Albert Einstein – waiting to start recruiting. 

Since March 25, 2020, the Brazilian Ministry of Health has 
adopted that drug as an adjuvant for the treatment exclusively 
of the severe forms of COVID-19, while also maintaining the 
other supportive measures. The indication considers that 
there is no other effective specific treatment available at the 
present time and that the recommendation can be modified at 
any time, depending on new evidence. On March 31, 2020, 
in a preprint study, without peer review, a Chinese group 
showed the superior efficacy of HCQ for mild pneumonia in 
62 patients assessed (with a control group).55 That should be 
confirmed in a study with higher sample power and stricter 
methodology. Other drugs being analyzed are glucocorticoids, 
immunoglobulins, interferon, and tocilizumab.

Cardiopulmonary resuscitation. When patients with 
COVID-19 have a cardiorespiratory arrest, special care should 
be taken, with special attention to airway management, 
because of the higher risk of contamination of healthcare 
workers performing aerosol-generating procedures.56,57 
All healthcare professionals in contact with patients with 
COVID-19 should follow the local and national orientations 
for infection control and use of personal protective equipment, 
which should be readily available.58,59

SARS-CoV-2 infected patients at risk for acute deterioration 
or cardiac arrest should be identified early, as should those 
for whom a ‘do not attempt cardiopulmonary resuscitation’ 
applies, and that should be based on local guidelines.58 

Hypoxia is the most probable cause of cardiorespiratory 
arrest among patients with COVID-19; however, all causes 
should be taken into account (hypoglycemia, acidosis, 
coronary thrombosis). The algorithms already validated 
should be applied according to the identification of 
shockable and non-shockable rhythms.56,57 Airway should 
be manipulated by experienced and skilled professionals. 
Healthcare professionals caring for patients with COVID-19, 
including physicians, nurses and physical therapists, are at 
higher risk of infection.60,61 Aerosol-generating procedures, 
such as non-invasive ventilation, high-flow nasal cannula 
therapy, and bag-valve-mask or bag-tracheal-tube ventilation, 
pose a particularly high risk.62 

Bag-valve-mask or bag-tracheal-tube ventilation should 
be avoided, because of its elevated risk of aerosolization and 
contamination of the team; moreover, that type of ventilation 
has not proven to be superior to the mechanical one.56 If 
bag-valve-mask ventilation is necessary, the mask should be 
properly sealed, which requires more than one professional. 
In addition, the use of filters between the mask and the 
bag is mandatory. For those patients, the establishment of 
advanced airway should be prioritized and conducted by 
skilled individuals.56 If intubation fails or is impossible, other 
devices should be used, such as laryngeal tube or mask, to 
enable closed-circuit mechanical ventilation until definite 
access to airway is obtained, by either tracheal intubation 
or cricothyroidostomy.57 

In case of cardiorespiratory arrest of patients on 
mechanical ventilation, to prevent aerosol contamination from 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation maneuvers and ventilation, 
the patient should remain connected to the mechanical 
ventilator in a closed-circuit system, maintaining FiO2 at 
100%, asynchronous mode, and respiratory rate of 10-12 
bpm (Figure 4).56

The literature provides suggestive evidence that the 
exacerbated systemic inflammatory response present in 
COVID-19 causes endothelial dysfunction and increased 
procoagulant activity, which, in association with lower oxygen 
supply, might contribute to coronary plaque instability or to 
thrombus formation on a ruptured coronary plaque, and, thus, 
to plaque vulnerability.10,11,63 It is worth noting the importance 
of the differential diagnosis of obstructive coronary artery 
disease from type II myocardial infarction.64 Patients with 
COVID-19 can present with acute coronary syndrome due 
to a mismatch in myocardial oxygen supply and demand, 
being diagnosed with type II myocardial infarction. The cases 
should be analyzed individually, because a large part should 
be managed conservatively, considering that 7% of the patients 
with COVID-19 and acute coronary syndrome might have 
type II myocardial infarction or myocarditis.64

The approach to acute coronary syndrome in patients with 
COVID-19 should consider the availability of local resources, 
such as structured catheterization laboratories, coronary care 
unit and/or ICU beds, and adequacy of the environment to the 
protective measures against SARS-CoV-2.64 A Chinese report has 
suggested that thrombolysis should be the first-choice therapy for 
patients with COVID-19. That is a controversial recommendation, 
especially where primary angioplasty can be performed, 
respecting all the safety rules for protection of healthcare 
professionals and hospital environment (personal protective 
equipment, negative pressure room, proper cleaning).64 

The treatment of cardiovascular complications should 
be based on the ideal and careful use of the therapies 
recommended in the guidelines. Therapy with ACEI, ARB, 
beta-blockers, antiplatelet agents and statins should abide 
by the recommendations in the guidelines, respecting the 
contraindications related to hemodynamic stability and 
presence of other organic dysfunctions.21 

Patients with COVID-19 are at a higher risk of venous 
thromboembolism, because of their prolonged physical 
inactivity and their abnormal coagulation parameters.4 The use 
of non-pharmacological prophylaxis strategies is recommended 
for all in-patients with COVID-19. Pharmacological strategies 
should be considered, such as the use of unfractionated or 
low-molecular-weight heparin, taking into account the latter’s 
contraindications and the patient’s creatinine clearance. 
Venous thromboembolism should be suspected based on 
clinical criteria, in situations such as maintenance of high 
d-dimer levels and refractory hypoxemia, or in the presence 
of echocardiographic signs of pulmonary hypertension and 
right ventricular dysfunction.

Because of the exponential viral spread, social distancing has 
been determined as a key-factor to reduce the speed of spread 
by reducing person-to-person contact. The use of information 
technology, thus, is mandatory as an emergency response to 
environmental issues or biological risks. Telehealth enables remote 
triage, supports the diagnosis of diseases, and ensures access to 
routine care during an infectious disease outbreak.65 

In 2019, the Brazilian Medical Board published a decree 
defining telemedicine as the technology-mediated practice of 
medicine aimed at health care, education, research, prevention 
of diseases and injuries, and health promotion, regulating that 
practice. The Brazilian Society of Cardiology has issued a guideline 
on telemedicine applied to cardiology, also named telecardiology. 
Telecardiology by acting in health promotion, disease prevention, 
diagnosis, treatment and rehabilitation, which impact the quality 
of life, can be considered an important ally of the health system, 
be it public, supplementary or private, to promote quality integral 
health care. The implementation of telecardiology is important to 
primary and specialized health care.66 In cardiology, telemedicine 
can be useful to control risk factors, such as blood pressure and 
diabetes mellitus, to improve the lipid profile, to reduce weight, 
and to increase the success rate of smoking cessation programs.66

At the current stage of pandemic control, telemedicine 
became a useful tool, especially for patients at high risk, reducing 
the exposure to SARS-CoV-2 and helping control comorbidities. 
On March 19, 2020, the Brazilian Medical Board, in accordance 
with the Brazilian Ministry of Health, recognized the possibility 
and ethical character of telemedicine regarding teleguidance, 
teleconsultation, and telemonitoring.67

General recommendations

• Intensify the care and preventive measures against the novel 
coronavirus infection in the population with CVD.

• Patients with CVD should be managed according to 
current guidelines, ensuring the best treatment available for 
chronic illnesses. 

• It is essential that patients with CVD maintain strict adherence 
to proper diet, regular sleep and physical activity, avoiding tobacco 
and alcohol consumption.

• It is important to update vaccines. This includes the 
pneumococcal vaccine, because of the increased risk of bacterial 
infection secondary to SARS-CoV-2, and the influenza vaccine, 
indicated for patients with CVD.  

• Outpatient appointments as well as elective tests and 
procedures should be postponed if clinical discretion determines 
they are not essential and if not performing them neither increases 
the risk of events nor hinders the clinical management of an 
underlying CVD. Telemedicine should be used to help patient’s 
follow-up. 

• The number of healthcare professionals taking part in ward 
rounds for patients should be reduced, and online discussion 
should be implemented.

COVID-19 is potentially severe and has a high spread rate. 
Current data available are mainly derived from retrospective 
studies and should be cautiously interpreted. However, current 
evidence already shows the need to pay special attention to 
patients at risk and the importance of the proper management 
of cardiovascular complications, with rapid identification and 
implementation of adequate treatment.
