The World Health Organization recognized in March 2020 the existence of a pandemic for the new coronavirus that appeared in China, 
in late 2019, and whose disease was named COVID-19. In this context, the SBAIT (Brazilian Society of Integrated Care for Traumatized 
Patients) conducted a survey with 219 trauma and emergency surgeons regarding the availability of personal protective equipment (PPE) 
and the role of the surgeon in this pandemic by means of an electronic survey. It was observed that surgeons have been acting under 
inadequate conditions, with a lack of basic supplies as well as more specific equipment such as N95 masks and facial shields for the care of 
potential victims who may be contaminated. The latter increases the risk of contamination of professionals, resulting in potential losses in 
the working teams. Immediate measures must be taken to guarantee access to safety equipment throughout the country, since all trauma 
victims and/or patients with emergency surgical conditions must be treated as potential carriers of COVID-19.

The World Health Organization recognized in March 
2020 the existence of a pandemic for the new 
coronavirus that appeared in China in late 2019, and 
whose disease was named COVID-19. It presents an 
expressive capacity of transmission and propagation, in 
a world population without natural defenses against this 
disease, and results in considerable mortality especially 
in the elderly and people with chronic diseases. 
Furthermore, it threatens the collapse of the healthcare 
system, with the sudden overload of hospitals and 
intensive care units, consuming all essential equipment 
for the treatment of these patients, such as mechanical 
ventilators, and also leading to the lack of personal 
protective equipment (PPE) for the professionals who care 
for these patients, further increasing the contamination 
of the health personnel, contributing to the collapse of 
the entire system.

Also, it should be highlighted that other serious 
problems such as trauma and other surgical emergencies 
continue to arrive at the emergency departments in 
Brazil. In these scenarios, surgeons are taking care of 
these patients who arrive, in parallel with the admission 
of patients with COVID-19, and with difficulties in 
protecting themselves with appropriate PPE.

The lack of equipment as well as the overload 
of exposure to COVID-19, mean that health professionals 
are considered a highly vulnerable population. Several 
papers have shown that thousands of health professionals 
have already been infected, and hundreds have died 
from the disease. According to the New York Times, 
of the more than 40,000 confirmed cases in Spain, 
approximately 5,400 are health professionals (14%), 
these numbers are also observed in other countries with 
high rates of infection1. By the beginning of March, China 
reported more than 3,300 infected health care workers 
and at least 22 deaths2,3. Protective guidelines are more 
essential than ever for emergency professionals and 
surgeons when considering the risks of contamination 
from invasive procedures. 

In this context, SBAIT conducted a survey with 
trauma and acute care surgeons regarding the availability 
of PPE and the role of the surgeon in this pandemic.

This is a prospective questionnaire using the 
SurveyMonkey tool (http://www.surveymonkey.com)4 and 
distributed electronically (list of emails and WhatsApp 
groups) to SBAIT members, composed of trauma and 
acute care surgeons as well as non-members, totaling 
approximately 1,500 forms sent. The questionnaire 
consisted of 14 questions, 13 of which were objective and 
one that the surgeon could write observations relevant 
to the topic. The questions addressed the kind of facility 
and region of work, personal safety situation and which 
kind of PPE were available to handle trauma patients, 
considering both, patients with and without the diagnosis 
of COVID-19, and who have potentially surgical diseases. 
The data obtained were automatically transferred to an 
Excel file, to be analyzed.

Participation in the questionnaire was voluntary 
and spontaneous, and all responses were anonymous. This 
type of survey does not require ethics committee approval.

Of the 1,500 forms sent, 219 responses 
were obtained (14.6%). The majority of the surgeons 
come from the South and Southeast regions of Brazil 
(54.3%) as shown in Figure 1. Of these, 82% work in 
the emergency room and/or trauma bay, with only a 
small portion reporting having had contact with known 
COVID-19 positive patients.

When assessing the type of institution where 
the professionals work, it was observed that most of them 
had professional activities in municipal public hospitals 
(22.8%), public state hospitals (63.9%) or social health 
organizations (OSS) (17.3%), and it was also noted that 
more than 50% of the surgeons also work in private 
hospitals (Figure 2).

Regarding the personal safety of surgeons, 
in the current COVID-19 pandemic, it can be seen that 
15.5% of them answered that they consider themselves 
safe to work, while 49.7% consider themselves partially 
safe and 32.4% do not consider themselves safe to 
provide care for potentially infected patients (Figure 3).

Regarding personal protective equipment (PPE), 
it was highlighted that none of the items mentioned as 
those considered ideal for the care of trauma victims 
reached 100% availability among the 219 respondants. 
Even basic materials such as gloves (93.6%), surgical mask 
(89%) surgical caps (86.3%), which in theory should be 
available in 100% of the services were not available in 
some locations (Figure 4).

When asked about what type of safety 
equipment the surgeon used while in the hospital, 115 
(52.5%) reported using a conventional surgical mask, 
with 30% reported not using any type of personal 
protective device. As for the types of protection used 
to care for patients without suspected COVID-19, it 
was observed that 43.8% of surgeons use conventional 
surgical masks even in non-suspected cases, and 36.5% 
of them reported the use of an N95 mask (Figure 5). 
When asked about the use of PPE for surgical procedures 
in patients without suspected virus infection, the answers 
were practically the same as those obtained for the care 
of victims without clinical suspicion.

With regards to laparoscopic surgery and 
the potential risk of spreading the virus through 
pneumoperitoneum, it was observed that the majority of 
surgeons (52.9%) are not performing such procedures at 
the present time, 23.7% have refrained from performing 
such procedures only in suspected and/or confirmed 
cases and 16.4% of surgeons have maintained the usual 
indications (Figure 6).

Regarding indications and surgical management 
of an emergency case (traumatic or not), it was observed 
that 81 surgeons (36.9%) maintain their usual indications and approaches without changes. However, 51.6% of them have performed thoracic CT scan and/or in selected cases and 7.7% have opted for non-operative treatment whenever possible (Figure 7).

Considering that obtaining a definitive airway is 
part of the day-to-day tasks of this group of professionals, 
we evaluated the type of material available to perform 
oral-tracheal intubation, and the majority of surgeons 
(55.7%) reported having the face shield and fan filter 
(42%) available. Unfortunately, only a small number of 
professionals’ report having the video laryngoscope for 
intubation available (Figure 8).

As for the PPE available for these surgeons to 
perform an operative procedure, it was observed that 
less than half of them had protective equipment as 
recommended by Anvisa (National Health Surveillance 
Agency) (46.5%). Seventy-nine surgeons (36.1%) report 
having less than recommended and 14.6% did not know 
about such recommendations.

It this study 63% of surgeons reported having 
difficulties in obtaining PPE in their hospitals. Finally, 
53.4% (116) of surgeons did not know any health 
professional who has been infected by the virus.

It is well known that injuries resulting from 
trauma represent the main cause of death in the 
population under 45 years of age worldwide5. It is 
estimated that about 6 million people die each year as a 
result of such injuries. This number corresponds to about 
10% of deaths in the world, killing more than malaria, 
tuberculosis and HIV combined6,7. 

As of April 15, 2020, according to the 
Coronavirus 
Resource 
Center 
of 
Johns 
Hopkins 
University, more than 2 million people worldwide and 
more than 30,000 people in Brazil, have been infected 
with COVID-19, causing the death of more than 140,000 
people around the world8. 

In Brazil today, the vast majority of trauma 
victims are admitted to public hospitals and OSS, where 
approximately 62% of surgeons who responded to the 
current survey carry out their activities. By April 12, 2020 
the Brazilian Medical Association (AMB) had received 
3,031 complaints about the lack of PPE for patient care. 
At the present time, both the public and private sector 
are suffering from the lack of materials and equipment, 
placing healthcare professionals at risk. Of the 826 
institutions consulted by AMB, 95% were experiencing 
supply problems9.

The scarcity of equipment reported to AMB was 
related to the availability of N95 masks (87%), followed 
by goggles or face shields (70%) and fluid resistant gowns 
(66%). The degree of exposure and risk is such that 26% 
of the respondants reported lack of gloves and 35% of 
alcohol-based hand sanitizers. Such data corroborate the 
findings of the present study as shown in Figure 4.

Assistance to trauma victims follows well-
established protocols such as Advanced Trauma Life 
Support©(ATLS), which assumes that professionals who 
assist such victims must be wearing appropriated PPE, 
such as face shields, goggles, fluid resistant gowns and 
gloves, and such recommendations have been made for 
decades by the American College of Surgeons and its 
Committee on Trauma10. Unfortunately, there are few 
public and even academic hospitals in Brazil that follow 
these rules correctly, placing professionals at increased 
risk of being exposed to personal contamination by body 
fluids, secretions and more recently to aerosol from the 
airways of potentially contaminated patients.

ANVISA recently published a technical note that 
determines that health care professionals who perform 
procedures less than 1 meter away from suspected or 
confirmed patients for coronavirus infection should follow 
the following guidelines: hand hygiene, goggles and/
or face shields, surgical masks, which must be replaced 
by N95/PFF2 mask when performing aerosol-generating 
procedures, gloves and fluid resistant gowns11,12.

Unfortunately, 
the 
present 
study 
shows 
that among the 219 surgeons who responded to the 
survey, 32 of them were not even aware of ANVISA’s 
recommendations, clearly demonstrating that educational 
actions by medical societies and health authorities, must 
be optimized in order to make all health care professionals 
aware of their guidelines and recommendations.

In a recent electronic publication, Machado Jr 
recommends for all trauma centers that surgeons have 
ample access to PPE as well as institutional policies for 
airway management13. In the same way, Lima et al, 
presented recommendations for emergency surgery 
during the pandemic, pointing out that the use of 
protective equipment combined with adequate surgical 
technique and correct surgical planning represent the 
best way to reduce contamination rates among health 
professionals14.

Finally when the surgeons were asked about 
the indications for laparoscopic access for emergency 
surgeries, there was a tendency to avoid or even not use 
them, in agreement with the current recommendations 
of several medical societies due to the risk of 
contamination of the team by aerosol emission from 
pneumoperitoneum15,16.

The lack of protective equipment has been 
affecting surgeons around the world. In the present 
study, we can say that more than 80% of surgeons report 
feeling partially or totally unsafe for care. In the UK, 
Rimmer reports that a third of surgeons (32.5% of a total 
of 1978 responses) pointed to problems with the supply 
of protective equipment in their hospitals. More than half 
of the surveyed surgeons claimed to have had problems 
to have PPE supplies in their hospitals throughout the last 
30 days17.

Unfortunately, we can expect casualties to 
increase among the workforce in hospitals, due to both 
the contamination of surgeons working in the front lines as 
well as due to the stress resulting from the daily exposure 
to cases not only of trauma but also of those infected with 
COVID-19. Lai et al presented the psychological effects 
among 1257 health professionals who worked in Wuhan 
during the peak of the pandemic and identified high rates 
of depression (50.4%), anxiety (44.6%), insomnia (34%) 
and stress (71.5%) among respondents18.

The current pandemic was unexpected and 
unimaginable for many until 3 months ago. Nonetheless, 
it has exposed several weaknesses in the healthcare 
systems around the world, which were not prepared for 
such an event. Alerts by scientific19 and non-scientific20 
communities have been made in the last decade, but to 
no avail.

The concern about the loss of contaminated 
health professionals who will be temporarily out of action 
and some who will not survive is a huge burden for the 
society and health systems. The protection of these 
professionals must be a priority at this time, as well as 
making information available to everyone.

This study has limitations, which, despite being 
national in scope, did not reach all states and medical 
services equally. In addition, the proportion of responses 
may not be of statistical power to support it since the 
response rate was only 14.6%. Despite this limitation, 
it was considered a priority due to the need for a rapid 
assessment of the situation in the country, and for 
recommendations to be proposed in a timely manner. 
Importantly, this is the first survey conducted in Brazil 
with this focus during the current pandemic.

SBAIT published recommendations for surgeons 
in its media channels last month, but it is believed that 
communication should still be expanded. In times of 
greatest crisis, the communication process becomes 
essential for us to protect more lives21.

In conclusion, the trauma and acute care 
surgeons are in a situation of fragility and risk during the 
current pandemic, attending traumatized and critical ill 
patients in most cases without the proper PPE, exposing 
themselves to contamination. The dissemination of 
information that can protect surgeons is key in this 
moment of crisis throughout the health system in Brazil 
and the world.
