Publication status: Not informed by the submitting author
Myocardial Insulin Resistance
Luis Jesuino de Oliveira Andrade, Ingrid Silva Santos Padilha, Luís Matos de Oliveira, Gabriela
Correia Matos de Oliveira
https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3332
Submitted on: 2021-12-07
Posted on: 2021-12-08 (version 1)
(YYYY-MM-DD)
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
Myocardial Insulin Resistance 
 
Luis Jesuino de Oliveira Andrade 
Departamento de Saúde – Universidade Estadual de Santa Cruz – Ilhéus – Bahia – 
Brazil. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7714-0330 
Ingrid Silva Santos Padilha 
Departamento de Saúde – Universidade Estadual de Santa Cruz – Ilhéus – Bahia – 
Brazil. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6840-9203 
Luis Matos de Oliveira 
Faculdade de Medicina – Bahia – Brazil. https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4854-6910 
Gabriela Correia Matos de Oliveira 
Faculdade de Medicina – UniFTC – Salvador – Bahia – Brazil. https://orcid.org/0000-
0002-8042-0261 
 
Author contributions 
Conception and design: Luis Jesuino de Oliveira Andrade 
Analysis and interpretation: Luis Jesuino de Oliveira Andrade, Ingrid Silva Santos 
Padilha, Luis Matos de Oliveira, Gabriela Correia Matos de Oliveira. 
Data collection: Luis Jesuino de Oliveira Andrade, Luis Matos de Oliveira, Gabriela 
Correia Matos de Oliveira. 
Writing the article: Luis Jesuino de Oliveira Andrade, Gabriela Correia Matos de 
Oliveira. 
Critical revision of the article:  Luis Jesuino de Oliveira Andrade, Ingrid Silva Santos 
Padilha, Luis Matos de Oliveira, Gabriela Correia Matos de Oliveira. 
Final approval of the article:  Luis Jesuino de Oliveira Andrade, Ingrid Silva Santos 
Padilha, Luis Matos de Oliveira, Gabriela Correia Matos de Oliveira. 
Overall responsibility: Luis Jesuino de Oliveira Andrade 
Corresponding Author: 
Luís Jesuíno de Oliveira Andrade 
UESC -Departamento de Saúde Campus Soane Nazaré de Andrade, Rod. Jorge Amado, 
Km 16 -Salobrinho, Ilhéus -BA, 45662-900,  e-mail: luis_jesuino@yahoo.com.br. 
 
Disclosure of potential conflicts of interest: 
None of the authors haveany potential conflicts of interest to disclose 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3332
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
Abstract 
Background: 
The low available of Glut-4 transporters in sarcolemma of the cardiac cells is what 
characterizes the myocardial insulin resistance (MIR), which is triggered separately of 
generalized insulin resistance. Insulin receptors are quite evident in the heart muscle and 
vessels, and mitochondrial activity performs a significant function in MIR preserving 
cellular homeostasis by cell reproduction, cells livelihoods, and energy generation. 
Objective:  
To evaluate the MIR mechanism and through the signaling pathway design. 
Methods:  
PubMed database was employed to search for reviews publications with MIR. The 
referenced data of the signaling pathway was chosen aggregating references of the 
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database. A signaling pathway 
was designed based on MIR research manuscripts, where we show several mechanisms 
included in the MIR. The KEGG server was employed to exploit the interrelationship 
protein-protein, and elaborate signaling pathway diagram. The signaling pathway 
mapping was carried out with PathVisio software. 
Results:  
We selected 42 articles from a total of 450 articles in the PubMed database that 
presented a significant association between the terms "insulin resistance myocardial" 
AND "signaling pathway". Founded on database-validated research papers, we choose 
well-founded pathways and we succeeded representative description of these pathways. 
The reproduction contigs taken from the KEGG database designed the signaling 
pathway of the bio-molecules that lead to MIR. Thus, the acting among multiple 
mechanisms releases factors that participate of the development of MIR. 
Conclusion:  
The interaction among various mechanisms and molecular interactions are important 
factors in development of MIR.  
 
Keywords: Myocardial; Insulin resistance; Signaling pathway. 
 
 
 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3332
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
Introduction 
Insulin resistance is a clinical/pathological status recognized through of 
hyperinsulinemia and altered glucose homeostasis, transforming various functions of 
the cell and contributing to the onset of several diseases. It has been observed that 
insulin resistance is present not only in type 2 diabetes but also in various organs and 
tissues, including the skeletal muscle, adipose tissue, and hepatic parenchyma, as well 
as the vascular tissue and cardiac muscle, which in majority cases are just evaluated in 
circumstances of the progression of chronic diseases1. It has been proposed that the 
heart is an organ that is not only a brand of systemic insulin resistance, as well as of 
myocardial insulin resistance (MIR), with MIR being an independent risk factor for 
heart disease. 
The MIR is defined by the impairment of glucose uptake and utilization as an 
energy source by cardiac muscle2. MIR usually occurs at the same time as systemic 
insulin resistance or as a consequence of systemic insulin resistance3,4. 
The heart is an insulin-sensitive organ, and studies have demonstrated the 
occurrence of myocardial insulin resistance especially in subjects with heart failure, 
where a significant association between MIR and the development of heart failure has 
been found even in metabolically compensated diabetic subjects5. 
 
The intracellular signaling pathway of MIR is complex, involving several factors 
and molecules, and activation of specific points in the myocardium has been 
demonstrated in individuals with insulin resistance6. Alterations in normal insulin 
signaling pathways such as those occurring in MIR contribute as increased risk factors 
for the development of cardiac dysfunctions. Therefore, if we take into consideration the 
repercussions of insulin resistance on the heart, it is interesting to differentiate between 
the outcomes secondary to over activation of signaling pathways that remain sensitive 
to insulin versus changes that are a consequence of an impaired ability of insulin to 
regulate glucose metabolism. 
 
The complex outcomes of insulin signaling pathways in cardiac muscle 
associated with the systemic metabolic changes that define insulin-resistance states will 
determine the MIR2. 
 
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the MIR mechanism and through the 
signaling pathway design based in research articles. 
 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3332
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
Methods 
Modeling of Signaling Pathway of Myocardial Insulin Resistance 
The planning of molecular pathway maps involved a meticulous extraction of 
molecular properties from in the medical literature, followed by the establishment of the 
several components in a series of interconnected occurrences. 
 
Supported in research paper, we choose well-reasoned pathways and we collect 
characteristics expression outline from those pathways. PubMed database was 
employed to evaluate reviews publications who have researched the MIR. The 
referenced data of the signaling pathway was chosen aggregating references of the 
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database. 
The KEGG is a database with signaling pathway maps, and references about 
biological process networks, genome sequencing, protein domains, aiming at 
understanding and using this data scientifically7. 
 
We evaluate a total of 15 signaling pathways in KEGG database, and for each 
signaling pathways we distinguish the proteins associated to the MIR. We evaluate a 
total of fifteen signaling pathways in KEGG database, and for each signaling pathways 
we distinguish the proteins associated to the MIR. We then confronted the proteins and 
the fifteen interrelations. The KEGG database contains information about proteins, 
including pathway data proven in diagrams that make it feasible to build the 
interactivity of proteins into complex organic methods. 
 
The graphic design of the signaling pathway was prepared using PathVisio 
software (version 3.3.0), and was applied to the graphic display of the signaling 
pathway, as it is a tool that enables the visibility and editing of biological signaling 
pathways. PathVisio is a free download path editor, bundled with the WikiPathways 
community pathway database and freely available for biological pathway evaluation. 
 
Results 
When searching the PubMed database using the term "insulin resistance 
myocardial", we identified 4,373 results, and when using the association of the terms 
"insulin resistance myocardial" AND "signaling pathway" we found 450 results. We 
selected only 42 articles that presented a significant association between the terms used. 
The basic mechanisms of insulin resistance as well as their interaction with 
different proteins in triggering of MIR are presented in Figure 1. 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3332
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
AGT: angiotensinogen; AKT: protein kinase B; CD36: cluster of differentiation 36; 
FAO: fatty acids oxidation; FATPs: Fatty acid transport proteins; FFA: free fatty acids; 
GLUT4: Glucose transporter type 4; GS: glycogen synthase; IKK β: nuclear factor-kB 
kinase β; INS: insulin; INSR: insulin receptor; IRS1: Insulin receptor substrate-1; 
ISPK1: insulin-stimulated protein kinase 1; JNK1: cJun NH2-terminal kinase 1; 
mTOR: Mammalian target of rapamycin; OS: oxidative stress; GKS3: glycogen 
synthase kinase 3; PI3K: phosphoinositide 3-kinase; PKCC: classical protein kinase C; 
PP-1; type-1 protein phosphatase; PPAα: peroxisome proliferators-activated receptor α; 
ROS: Reactive oxygen species; TNFR: tumor necrosis factor receptor; TNF-α: tumor 
necrosis factor alpha;  
Figure 1.  Insulin resistance Myocardial - Signaling pathway diagram design 
 
Discussion 
In our work, we interlink a revision study with computer molding to comprehend 
the signaling pathway leading to the MIR. 
Insulin leads to glucose uptake by cardiac muscle, adipocytes, and skeletal 
muscle through the connection of insulin to the cellular insulin receptor. Insulin 
resistance is defined as the reduced cellular ability to respond to the insulin action of 
several metabolic pathways, involving the transport of glucose to the various tissues, 
and is associated with several clinical situations, especially with type 2 diabetes 
mellitus, as well as with atherosclerosis, hypertension, and the metabolic syndrome8. 
MIR is a metabolic disorder of the cardiomyocyte, arising from a reduction in 
the effectiveness of the myocardial cell to absorb glucose as well as reduced 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3332
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
mitochondrial function and endothelial nitric oxide synthase. Thus, MIR is an 
independent risk factor of systemic insulin resistance for heart disease9. 
 
We demonstrate the progression of MIR through a signaling pathway based on 
several studies. In the initial cascade for the development of MIR, the hyperglycemia, 
tumor necrosis factor (TNF-α), angiotensinogen (AGT), free fatty acids (FFA), and of 
course insulin are involved. Usually, the normal cardiomyocytes gets most of its energy 
force through of glucose oxidation and FFA when in the fed state and the fasting state, 
respectively10.  
Hyperglycemia has been linked to MIR, since hyperglycemia acts on the 
antilipolysis effect of insulin leading to elevation of FFA that regulates glucose 
utilization by the myocardial cell11.  
TNFα is an important endocrine and paracrine regulator produced by activating 
macrophages and monocytes with immune and inflammatory activity and cellular 
pleiotropic actions. TNF-α is associated with the onset of insulin resistance, as its 
elevation leads to metabolic dysregulation in various tissues including the myocardium. 
TNF-α is an important pro-inflammatory mediator, and high levels of TNF-α induce 
insulin resistance at the myocardial cell level through activation of various 
transcriptional 
pathways, 
thereby 
altering 
insulin 
signaling 
through 
serine 
phosphorylation12. Tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 (TNFR1), is the main membrane 
receptor that binds TNF- α, which can activate other transcription factors mediating cell 
survival and regulating inflammation, and is linked to mitochondrial abnormalities in 
cardiac muscle, as well as myocardial insulin resistance13. 
AGT is α-globulin that is part of the renin-angiotensin system a regulator of 
blood pressure and fluid-electrolyte balance. AGT is synthesized in the liver and in 
adipose tissue and is a relevant regulator of blood pressure, being involved in insulin 
resistance through muscle vasoconstriction. Furthermore, hyperglycemia elevates the 
transcription of AGT secretion from the local angiotensin-converting enzyme14. 
Overexpression of angiotensinogen in myocardium decreased the level of cardiac fatty 
acid oxidation simultaneously with the reduction of medium chain acyl CoA 
dehydrogenase, of carnitine palmitoyl transporterase 1 and of (Peroxisome proliferator-
activated receptor-α (PPARα)15. 
FFA is lipid species resulting from triacylglycerol by ester bond cleavage 
secondary to the action of lipase. As mentioned earlier, the myocardial cell receives 
most of its energy force through FFA when in the fasting state10. Thus, elevations in 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3332
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
circulating FFA levels involve molecular mechanisms that lead to modifications in 
insulin signaling in cardiomyocytes that will determine MIR16. FFA penetrates the 
cardiomyocytes carried by transport proteins or through passive diffusion. FFA uptake 
by the myocardial cell also occurs via cluster of differentiation 36 through insulin 
stimulation17. 
INSR is a heterotetrameric receptor belonging to the family of tyrosine kinase 
receptors being formed by two α subunits spanning the extracellular segment, and two β 
subunits includes transmembrane and intracellular control18. It has been reported the 
different actions of insulin and the importance of its altered signaling in individuals 
presenting with MIR, which are characterized by reduced INSR activity19. 
 
Insulin acting directly on the myocardial cell will stimulate, through the 
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway, insulin-stimulated protein 
kinase-1 and protein phosphatase 1, which due to its main role in muscle glycogen 
production is a determinant in the pathogenesis of MIR due to the reduction of glycogen 
in cardiomyocytes20. 
 
In the central part of the MIR progression signaling pathway cascade the 
following components are involved: cJun NH2-terminal kinase 1 (JNK1), nuclear 
factor-kB kinase β (IKK β), reactive oxygen species (ROS), peroxisome proliferators-
activated receptor α (PPAα), fatty acids oxidation (FAO), Insulin receptor substrate-1 
(IRS1), phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), and protein kinase, classic (PKCC). 
 
JNK1 is a stress-stimulated protein kinase, and is involved in the development of 
MIR21. The mechanism involving JNK1 in MIR is explained by inhibition of insulin 
signaling mediated by serine-307 phosphorylation of IRS-122. Another key point in 
triggering MIR by increased JNK1 arising from increased macrophage concentration in 
myocardial tissue. 
 
IKKβ is one of two serine-threonine kinases that inhibit insulin action by 
decreasing phospho-tyrosine residues of IRS1 inducing insulin resistance23. IKKβ is 
able to interfere with metabolic branch of insulin signaling directly by phosphorylating 
IRS1 or by phosphorylating inhibitor of nuclear factor-κB having insulin resistance as a 
consequence. Furthermore, IKKβ plays an important role in the regulation of pro-
apoptotic activity as a feedback to oxidative stress24. Similarly, IKK stimulated by TNF-
α resulting in an upregulation of inflammatory mediators also plays a key role in the 
induction of MIR25.  
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3332
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
Studies have demonstrated the behavior of ROS in myocardial dysfunction 
associated with insulin resistance. There is evidence that ROS mediate cardiac injury 
from MIR by modifying protein signaling, altering cardiomyocyte metabolism, and 
promoting cardiac dysfunction. Hyperglycemia and insulin resistance induces an 
increase in ROS, initiating intracellular molecular signaling. Thus, cardiomyocyte-ROS 
act as an important messenger in the MIR signaling pathway26.  
 
PPAα is a nuclear receptor that commands a number of genes in different 
pathways of lipid metabolism and also plays an important role in MIR. PPAα in the 
cardiomyocyte plays an important role in the mechanism of FAO via FA transport, beta-
oxidation, and esterification, and regardless of the elevation of FA mobilization, its 
activators reduce plasma FFAs27. It has been suggested that the negative regulation of 
MIR by PPAα would be associated with PPAα-inhibition mediated through the 
PIK3/AKT/ mTOR signaling pathways28. 
 
Myocardial FAO is a complex system, and studies have shown that FAO has 
with consequences damage to the cardiomyocyte due to alterations in mitochondrial 
metabolism with blockage of glucose oxidation, increased production of lactic acid and 
hydrogen ions leading to MIR with heart failure29,30. Thus, studies suggest that reducing 
the efficacy of FAO would result in the accumulation of long-chain FA with consequent 
production of harmful lipid metabolites hastening the development of MIR31. 
 
IRS-1 is the key molecule in insulin signaling and its phosphorylation is one of 
the links in triggering the insulin resistance signaling pathway. IRS-1 is essential for the 
activity and homeostasis of the heart, and hyperinsulinemia inducing metabolic stress 
leads to its suppression in cardiomyocytes being one of the trigger points of MIR32. 
IRS-1 then attracts and activates PI3K, initiating a series of signaling events leading to 
the triggering of AKT and its various targets. Thus, MIR is related to the activation of 
this pathway due to IRS-1 deficiency33. 
 
PI3K are heterodimeric groups consisting of mediating and catalytic subunits 
that are involved in glucose metabolism and also participate in various cellular activities 
ranging from cell growth to apoptosis. Investigation of PI3K activity in insulin signaling 
has been evaluated, and studies show that its activity is decreased in insulin resistance34. 
In MIR, altered PI3K-related insulin signaling is associated with reduced cardiomyocyte 
FAO rates occurs as a function of mitochondrial dysfunction and reduced PPARα 
expression35.  
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3332
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
PKCc is a family of serine/threonine kinases that are important factors in cellular 
physiology, playing a central role in signaling for various cellular responses, and may 
influence insulin signaling through serine phosphorylation of IRS-136. Hyperglycemia 
activates PKCc, and insulin resistance in muscle demonstrated that PKCc are 
chronically controlled and phosphorylated in insulin resistance. In addition, PKCc-
mediated phosphorylation regulates glycogen synthase with its own changes in its 
signaling in myocytes related to insulin resistance37. Thus, the manifestation of PKCc in 
muscle is enough to control the insulin signaling cascade with changes in 
cardiomyocyte glucose metabolism38. 
 
In the final outcome of the MIR signaling cascade are implicated: insulin-
stimulated protein kinase 1 (ISPK1); type-1 protein phosphatase (PP-1); AKT2; mTOR; 
gliycogen synthase kinase 3 (GKS3); and glucose transporter type 4 (GLUT4). 
 
ISPK-1 is part of the family of serine/threonine protein kinases called ribosomal 
S6 kinases. ISPK-1 is mainly expressed in muscle and contributes to the pathogenesis of 
the intensified insulin deficiency of glycogen synthesis39. ISPK-1 may interfere with 
insulin's performance on metabolism by phosphorylating regulatory proteins. ISPK-1 
may interfere with insulin's performance on metabolism by phosphorylating regulatory 
proteins. ISPK-1 directly activates the activation of PP-1 by phosphorylation of the 
serine in the G subunit of this protein40. Oxidative stress on PP-1 causes a reduction in 
glycogen production that will trigger MIR. 
 
AKT2 is one of the three isoforms of the AKT family and performs an important 
function in the insulin signaling pathway. Studies show that AKT1 and AKT2 are the 
most prevalent isoforms in the myocardium, and the AKT2 isorform is critical for 
glucose uptake by the myocardial cell, an effect that is not dependent on AKT1, thus 
playing an important role in the development of MIR41. In addition, AKT2 participates 
in the phosphorylation of mTOR, activating the AKT/mTOR signaling cascade that 
culminates in the triggering of MIR2. 
 
GSK3 acts in protein biosynthesis, in addition to regulating cellular metabolism, 
and reducing glycogen. GSK3 has been linked to glucose homeostasis and the triggering 
of insulin resistance because of its role in controlling glycogen synthesis. Blocking the 
action of GSK3 leads to improved insulin action. GSK3 in cardiomyocyte and MIR has 
been shown to be associated with oxidative stress and reduced glycogen production42. 
 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3332
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
Conclusion:  
MIR demands a number of factors in its signaling pathway, and the interaction 
among various mechanisms and molecular interactions are important factors in 
development of MIR. 
 
References 
1. Sorriento D, Rusciano MR, Visco V, Fiordelisi A, Cerasuolo FA, Poggio P, et 
al. The Metabolic Role of GRK2 in Insulin Resistance and Associated 
Conditions. Cells. 2021;10(1):167. 
2. Riehle C, Abel ED. Insulin Signaling and Heart Failure. Circ Res. 
2016;118(7):1151-69. 
3. Mazumder PK, O'Neill BT, Roberts MW, Buchanan J, Yun UJ, Cooksey RC, et 
al. Impaired cardiac efficiency and increased fatty acid oxidation in insulin-
resistant ob/ob mouse hearts. Diabetes. 2004;53(9):2366-74. 
4. Ilkun O, Wilde N, Tuinei J, Pires KM, Zhu Y, Bugger H, et al. Antioxidant 
treatment normalizes mitochondrial energetics and myocardial insulin sensitivity 
independently of changes in systemic metabolic homeostasis in a mouse model 
of the metabolic syndrome. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2015;85:104-16. 
5. Saotome M, Ikoma T, Hasan P, Maekawa Y. Cardiac Insulin Resistance in Heart 
Failure: The Role of Mitochondrial Dynamics. Int J Mol Sci. 2019;20(14):3552. 
6. Cook SA, Varela-Carver A, Mongillo M, Kleinert C, Khan MT, Leccisotti L, et 
al. Abnormal myocardial insulin signalling in type 2 diabetes and left-ventricular 
dysfunction. Eur Heart J. 2010;31(1):100-11. 
7. Kanehisa M, Furumichi M, Tanabe M, Sato Y, Morishima K. KEGG: new 
perspectives on genomes, pathways, diseases and drugs. Nucleic Acids Res. 
2017;45(D1):D353-D361. 
8. Abel ED, O'Shea KM, Ramasamy R. Insulin resistance: metabolic mechanisms 
and 
consequences 
in 
the 
heart. 
Arterioscler 
Thromb 
Vasc 
Biol. 
2012;32(9):2068-76. 
9. Qi Y, Xu Z, Zhu Q, Thomas C, Kumar R, Feng H, et al. Myocardial loss of 
IRS1 and IRS2 causes heart failure and is controlled by p38α MAPK during 
insulin resistance. Diabetes. 2013; 62(11):3887-900. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3332
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
10. Iozzo P, Chareonthaitawee P, Dutka D, Betteridge DJ, Ferrannini E, Camici PG. 
Independent association of type 2 diabetes and coronary artery disease with 
myocardial insulin resistance. Diabetes. 2002;51(10):3020-4. 
11. Swan JW, Anker SD, Walton C, Godsland IF, Clark AL, Leyva F, et al. Insulin 
resistance in chronic heart failure: relation to severity and etiology of heart 
failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1997;30(2):527-32. 
12. Akash MSH, Rehman K, Liaqat A. Tumor Necrosis Factor-Alpha: Role in 
Development of Insulin Resistance and Pathogenesis of Type 2 Diabetes 
Mellitus. Cell Biochem. 2018;119(1):105-110. 
13. Metwally Ibrahim SEL, Kosba AA. Royal jelly supplementation reduces skeletal 
muscle lipotoxicity and insulin resistance in aged obese rats. Pathophysiology. 
2018;25(4):307-315 
14. Zhou MS, Schulman IH, Zeng Q. Link between the renin-angiotensin system 
and insulin resistance: implications for cardiovascular disease. Vasc Med. 
2012;17(5):330-41. 
15. Fillmore N, Mori J, Lopaschuk GD. Mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation 
alterations in heart failure, ischaemic heart disease and diabetic cardiomyopathy. 
Br J Pharmacol. 2014;171(8):2080-90. 
16. Han L, Liu J, Zhu L, Tan F, Qin Y, Huang H, et al. Free fatty acid can induce 
cardiac dysfunction and alter insulin signaling pathways in the heart. Lipids 
Health Dis. 2018;17(1):185. 
17. Goldberg IJ, Trent CM, Schulze PC. Lipid metabolism and toxicity in the heart. 
Cell Metab. 2012;15(6):805-12. 
18. Lee J, Pilch PF. The insulin receptor: structure, function, and signaling. Am J 
Physiol. 1994; 266(2 Pt 1):C319-34. 
19. Raher MJ, Thibault HB, Buys ES, Kuruppu D, Shimizu N, Brownell AL, et al. 
A short duration of high-fat diet induces insulin resistance and predisposes to 
adverse left ventricular remodeling after pressure overload. Am J Physiol Heart 
Circ Physiol. 2008;295(6):H2495-502. 
20. Bajaj M, Defronzo RA. Metabolic and molecular basis of insulin resistance. J 
Nucl Cardiol. 2003;10(3):311-23. 
21. Gorgani-Firuzjaee S, Ahmadi S, Meshkani R. Palmitate induces SHIP2 
expression via the ceramide-mediated activation of NF-κB, and JNK in skeletal 
muscle cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014;450(1):494-9. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3332
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
22. Zhang L, Keung W, Samokhvalov V, Wang W, Lopaschuk GD. Role of fatty 
acid uptake and fatty acid beta-oxidation in mediating insulin resistance in heart 
and skeletal muscle. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010;1801(1):1-22. 
23. Denhez B, Rousseau M, Spino C, Dancosst DA, Dumas MÈ, Guay A, et al. 
Saturated fatty acids induce insulin resistance in podocytes through inhibition of 
IRS1 via activation of both IKKbeta and mTORC1. Sci Rep. 2020;10(1):21628. 
24. Tilg H, Moschen AR. Inflammatory mechanisms in the regulation of insulin 
resistance. Mol Med. 2008;14(3-4):222-31. 
25. Rehman K, Akash MS. Mechanisms of inflammatory responses and 
development of insulin resistance: how are they interlinked? J Biomed Sci. 
2016;23(1):87. 
26. Mellor KM, Ritchie RH, Delbridge LM. Reactive oxygen species and insulin-
resistant cardiomyopathy. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 2010;37(2):222-8. 
27. Ferreira AV, Parreira GG, Green A, Botion LM. Effects of fenofibrate on lipid 
metabolism in adipose tissue of rats. Metabolism. 2006;55(6):731-5. 
28. Balakumar P, Sambathkumar R, Mahadevan N, Muhsinah AB, Alsayari A, 
Venkateswaramurthy N, et al. Molecular targets of fenofibrate in the 
cardiovascular-renal axis: A unifying perspective of its pleiotropic benefits. 
Pharmacol Res. 2019;144:132-141. 
29. Pasqua T, Rocca C, Giglio A, Angelone T. Cardiometabolism as an Interlocking 
Puzzle between the Healthy and Diseased Heart: New Frontiers in Therapeutic 
Applications. J Clin Med. 2021;10(4):721. 
30. Stanley WC, Recchia FA, Lopaschuk GD. Myocardial substrate metabolism in 
the normal and failing heart. Physiol Rev. 2005 Jul;85(3):1093-129. 
31. Lionetti V, Stanley WC, Recchia FA. Modulating fatty acid oxidation in heart 
failure. Cardiovasc Res. 2011;90(2):202-9. 
32. Guo CA, Guo S. Insulin receptor substrate signaling controls cardiac energy 
metabolism and heart failure. J Endocrinol. 2017;233(3):R131-R143. 
33. Soliman H, Nyamandi V, Garcia-Patino M, Varela JN, Bankar G, Lin G, et al. 
Partial deletion of ROCK2 protects mice from high-fat diet-induced cardiac 
insulin resistance and contractile dysfunction. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 
2015;309(1):H70-81. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3332
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
34. Cheng RD, Ren W, Sun P, Tian L, Zhang L, Zhang J, et al. Spinal cord injury 
causes insulin resistance associated with PI3K signaling pathway in 
hypothalamus. Neurochem Int. 2020;140:104839. 
35. Abel ED. Free fatty acid oxidation in insulin resistance and obesity. Heart 
Metab. 2010;48:5-10. 
36. Corbalán-García S, Gómez-Fernández JC. Classical protein kinases C are 
regulated 
by 
concerted 
interaction 
with 
lipids: 
the 
importance 
of 
phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate. Biophys Rev. 2014;6(1):3-14. 
37. Donnelly R, Chang H, Azhar S, Reaven GM. Tissue-dependent activation of 
protein 
kinase 
C 
in 
fructose-induced 
insulin 
resistance. 
Endocrine. 
1995;3(2):129-33. 
38. Hennige AM, Heni M, Machann J, Staiger H, Sartorius T, Hoene M, et al. 
Enforced expression of protein kinase C in skeletal muscle causes physical 
inactivity, fatty liver and insulin resistance in the brain. J Cell Mol Med. 
2010;14(4):903-13. 
39. Bjørbaek C, Vik TA, Echwald SM, Yang PY, Vestergaard H, Wang JP, et.al. 
Cloning of a human insulin-stimulated protein kinase (ISPK-1) gene and 
analysis of coding regions and mRNA levels of the ISPK-1 and the protein 
phosphatase-1 genes in muscle from NIDDM patients. Diabetes. 1995;44(1):90-
7. 
40. Moller DE, Xia CH, Tang W, Zhu AX, Jakubowski M. Human rsk isoforms: 
cloning and characterization of tissue-specific expression. Am J Physiol. 
1994;266(2 Pt 1):C351-9. 
41. Wang Q, Ren J. mTOR-Independent autophagy inducer trehalose rescues 
against insulin resistance-induced myocardial contractile anomalies: Role of p38 
MAPK and Foxo1. Pharmacol Res. 2016;111:357-373. 
42. Lee J, Kim MS. The role of GSK3 in glucose homeostasis and the development 
of insulin resistance. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2007;77 Suppl 1:S49-57. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3332
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
This preprint was submitted under the following conditions: 
The authors declare that they are aware that they are solely responsible for the content of the preprint and
that the deposit in SciELO Preprints does not mean any commitment on the part of SciELO, except its
preservation and dissemination.
The authors declare that the necessary Terms of Free and Informed Consent of participants or patients in
the research were obtained and are described in the manuscript, when applicable.
The authors declare that the preparation of the manuscript followed the ethical norms of scientific
communication.
The submitting author declares that the contributions of all authors and conflict of interest statement are
included explicitly and in specific sections of the manuscript.
The authors agree that the approved manuscript will be made available under a Creative Commons CC-BY
license.
The deposited manuscript is in PDF format.
The authors declare that the data, applications, and other content underlying the manuscript are
referenced.
The authors declare that the manuscript was not deposited and/or previously made available on another
preprint server or published by a journal.
If the manuscript is being reviewed or being prepared for publishing but not yet published by a journal, the
authors declare that they have received authorization from the journal to make this deposit.
The submitting author declares that all authors of the manuscript agree with the submission to SciELO
Preprints.
The authors declare that the research that originated the manuscript followed good ethical practices and
that the necessary approvals from research ethics committees, when applicable, are described in the
manuscript.
The authors agree that if the manuscript is accepted and posted on the SciELO Preprints server, it will be
withdrawn upon retraction.
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
