Publication status: Preprint has been published in a journal as an article
DOI of the published article: https://doi.org/10.1007/s40839-022-00173-x
TOWARDS AN ETHICAL-DIALOGICAL APPROACH TO RELIGIOUS
EDUCATION: A THEORETICAL ANALYSIS FROM THE CASES OF
IRELAND AND ENGLAND
Tarcisio Amorim Carvalho
https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3082
Submitted on: 2021-10-19
Posted on: 2021-12-20 (version 1)
(YYYY-MM-DD)
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
 
TOWARDS AN ETHICAL-DIALOGICAL APPROACH TO RELIGIOUS EDUCATION: A 
THEORETICAL ANALYSIS FROM THE CASES OF IRELAND AND ENGLAND 
 
TARCÍSIO AMORIM CARVALHO1 
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0166-2300 
 
 
Abstract: This article draws on the experiences of Ireland and England, which support different 
conceptions and practices of religious education (RE), in order to provide a normative 
framework for the organisation of RE in multicultural states. This analysis consists in an 
assessment of three conceptions of religious education: the liberal conception, which emphasises 
neutrality and objectivity; the pragmatist conception, which is egalitarian in character; and the 
tradition-oriented conception, which is based on a substantive ethics. Rejecting the view that 
religious education should be only informative and free from criticism of content, I will make the 
case for an ethical-dialogical approach to RE, whereby pupils can learn from each other’s beliefs 
and experiences, as availed by their own cultural traditions, without setting aside their capacity to 
evaluate different moral claims. This approach to RE is especially designed to 
multidenominational schools that recognise the ethical potential of learning from religion, but 
are sensible towards issues of conscience in plural environments.    
 
Keywords: 
Religious 
Education, 
Ethical-Dialogical 
Approach, 
England, 
Ireland, 
Multiculturalism. 
 
POR UMA ABORDAGEM ÉTICO-DIALÓGICA DA EDUCAÇÃO RELIGIOSA: UMA 
ANÁLISE TEÓRICA DOS CASOS DA IRLANDA E DA INGLATERRA 
 
 
Resumo: Este artigo baseia-se nas experiências da Irlanda e da Inglaterra, que proveem 
diferentes concepções e práticas de educação religiosa (ER), a fim de fornecer uma estrutura 
normativa para a organização de ER em estados multiculturais. Esta análise consiste em uma 
avaliação de três concepções de educação religiosa: a concepção liberal, que enfatiza a 
neutralidade e a objetividade; a concepção pragmatista, de caráter igualitário; e a concepção 
orientada para a tradição, que se baseia em uma ética substantiva. Rejeitando a visão de que a 
educação religiosa deve ser apenas informativa e livre de crítica de conteúdo, defendo uma 
abordagem ético-dialógica da ER, por meio da qual os alunos podem aprender com as crenças e 
experiências uns dos outros, de acordo com suas próprias tradições culturais, sem deixar de lado 
sua capacidade de avaliar diferentes reivindicações morais. Esta abordagem de ER é 
especialmente voltada para escolas multidenominacionais que reconhecem o potencial ético de se 
aprender com a religião, mas são sensíveis às questões de consciência em ambientes plurais. 
 
Palavras-chave: Educação Religiosa, Abordagem Ético-Dialógica, Inglaterra, Irlanda, 
Multiculturalismo. 
 
PARA UN ENFOQUE ÉTICO-DIALÓGICO DE LA EDUCACIÓN RELIGIOSA: UN 
ANÁLISIS TEÓRICO DE LOS CASOS DE IRLANDA E INGLATERRA 
 
 
                                                           
1 University College Dublin. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3082
 
2 
 
Resumen: Este artículo se basa en las experiencias de Irlanda e Inglaterra, que proporcionan 
diferentes concepciones y prácticas de la educación religiosa (ER) con el fin de proporcionar un 
marco normativo para la organización de las ER en estados multiculturales. Este análisis consiste 
en una evaluación de tres concepciones de la educación religiosa: la concepción liberal, que 
enfatiza la neutralidad y objetividad; la concepción pragmática, de carácter igualitario; y la 
concepción orientada a la tradición, que se basa en una ética sustantiva. Rechazando la opinión 
de que la educación religiosa solo debe ser informativa y estar libre de críticas de contenido, 
defiendo un enfoque ético-dialógico de la ER, a través del cual los estudiantes pueden aprender 
de las creencias y experiencias de los demás de acuerdo con sus propias tradiciones culturales, sin 
descuidar su capacidad para aprender. evaluar diferentes afirmaciones morales. Este enfoque de 
ER está especialmente dirigido a escuelas multidenominacionales que reconocen el potencial 
ético de aprender de la religión, pero son sensibles a los problemas de conciencia en entornos 
plurales. 
 
Palabras clave: Educación Religiosa, Enfoque Ético-Dialógico, Inglaterra, Irlanda, 
Multiculturalismo. 
 
 
How can religious education (RE) meet the requirements of intercultural learning in 
democratic contexts? In this article, I assess different conceptions and models of RE in Ireland 
and England, with a view to construing a normative framework that meets the requirements of a 
dialogical rationality. Pointing out the links between cognitive and experiential knowledge, I 
reject the liberal view that religious education should be purely information-oriented. 
Furthermore, I stress that, without a transcendental perspective of truth enquiry, egalitarian 
models of religious education are not well suited to motivate citizens to expand their cultural 
horizons beyond the boundaries of their local communities. With this in mind, I make the case 
for an ethical-dialogical account of religious education, which allows for the articulation of moral 
perceptions from each pupil’s experience of the religious phenomenon, as well as the critical 
appreciation of religious and secular truth claims. 
THE NEUTRALIST-LIBERAL CONCEPTION 
The neutralist-liberal conception of Religious Education (RE) is characterised by a 
particular emphasis on the idea of impartiality, which is supposed to be achieved when the 
educative process is carried out in a “objective, critical and pluralistic” manner, as in accordance 
with the normative principles supported by the European Court of Human Rights (Folgerø v. 
Norway, 2007; Hasan and Eylem Zengin v. Turkey, 2008; Lautsi v. Italy, 2011). As I will show, 
this perspective points to the assumption that there is a neutral, independent standpoint of 
reason, which is the source of normative values and scientific standards for any educative 
enterprise. Underlining this perspective is a secular view of public morality, as well as a formal 
account of the educative process, which separates cognitive knowledge from its practical 
dimension.     
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3082
 
3 
 
The Neutralist-Liberal Conception: Ireland 
Among the proponents of the neutralist-liberal conception in Ireland are 
organisations such as the Humanist Association of Ireland (HAI), the Education Equality group 
and Atheist Ireland. Although they all share the view that the educational system in Ireland has 
to be reformed, so as to prevent discrimination in admission and enforce children’s and parents’ 
rights of conscience, their proposals regarding the study of religion at present are somewhat 
different in nuance.   
For the HAI, the public school should foster social cohesion through the imparting 
of shared values that account for the needs of every citizen and group represented in the 
country. RE should be merely informative, based on the comparative study of religious and non-
religious worldviews. They are strongly opposed to the denominational model which, in the 
HAI’s opinion, reinforces divisive tendencies in Irish societies, especially in separating pupils 
during classes of RE. In contrast with this practice, the HAI favours a model of RE that can be 
accessible to all pupils, without violating their basic rights, with the confinement of confessional 
instruction to outside school hours.  
Indeed, the perception of RE that the HAI stands for is one that entails an objective 
imparting of RE contents, regardless of the religious composition of the school, with a view to 
achieving educational neutrality. As they note in their 2011 submission to the Irish Human 
Rights Commission for Education and Religion: 
In the good society, religious belief would be a purely private matter and the public arena, including 
schools, would be strictly neutral in this area. Schools should promote social cohesion and an open 
society, based on shared human values, and genuinely inclusive and accommodating towards religious 
and non-religious requirements of those they serve, including tiny minorities. Otherwise, we risk a 
tyranny of the majority, where powerful or well organised minorities can insist on their needs being 
accommodated and disregarding those of others (HAI, 2001, p. 14). 
 
The relegation of issues of belief to the private sphere, combined with an egalitarian 
conception of education that, drawing on “shared human values”, precludes differential 
treatment for majority groups and minorities, points to a liberal perception that separates 
objective and practical knowledge. According to this view, a RE syllabus should have as its only 
purpose the examination of the factual and cognitive dimension of religious phenomena. 
This concern with the objectivity of the educative process is also shared by Atheist 
Ireland, which strongly criticises the multidenominational model of RE carried out by Educate 
Together schools, in view of its tendency to bringing in symbolic elements for constructive 
knowledge, as well as blurring the boundaries between the public and the private sphere. For 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3082
 
4 
 
their members, RE should be devoid of interference from religious practices in the local 
community in such a way that celebrations, rituals and religious symbols are completely absent 
from the school environment. They believe that only this conception of secular education is 
capable of meeting the UN’s requirements for a pluralistic education. In their words: 
A non-denominational or secular school would provide an ethics programme, but it would not 
combine moral and spiritual development as part of an ethics programme. A secular school would 
recognise that morality is independent of spirituality (Doyle, 2014). 
 
As the European Court has been insisting on the necessity to provide citizens with 
access to a schooling system whereby educational contents are imparted in an objective, critical 
and pluralist manner, it is easier to assume that a secular education, drawing mainly on the 
historical dimension of the religious phenomenon, can best serve this purpose.  
  
The Neutralist-Liberal Conception: England  
As in Ireland, the organisation Humanist UK, formerly the British Humanist 
Association, pushes for RE to become “an inclusive, impartial, objective, fair, balanced and 
relevant subject allowing pupils to explore a variety of religions and non-religious worldviews” 
(Humanist UK, 2017). Even though the group welcomed the initiative of the Qualifications and 
Curriculum Authority to publish a non-statutory National Framework for Religious Education 
(NFRE) (2014), their leadership have been raising concerns about the proper place given to 
Humanism in the composition of RE syllabuses, as suggested by that document. In fact, even 
though the NFRE recommended the study of Christianity throughout all key stages, it endorsed 
a demographic logic for the appreciation of other religious and secular ethical systems. In this 
sense, humanism should become part of the RE syllabus, only “where appropriate”, while the 
decision regarding its inclusion should be at the discretion of each Local Education Authority 
(LEA). Thus, against what they refer to as the “NFRE’s deliberately light touch approach”, the 
organisation has been seeking parity in the treatment of Humanism and other religions, which in 
their view can only be achieved through the centralisation of the RE syllabus in accordance with 
a National Framework (Watson, 2007, p. 2). 
Here, the departure from an in-depth approach to religious phenomena that results 
from the widening of the range of religions covered by the syllabus, with the aim to make RE 
impartial towards the diversity of religious and non-religious lifestyles, points to a similar 
epistemological interpretation of the process of knowledge acquisition, which prescinds from 
practical engagements in the assessment of ethical contents.  
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3082
 
5 
 
This is also the perception of the National Secular Society, which has been raising 
serious criticism of the privilege enjoyed by Christianity in RE provisions, while stressing the 
necessity for objectivity and neutrality in the whole curriculum: 
(…) we believe the in-depth teaching of a specific faith should be a parental responsibility, for those 
that want it, and not the role of state education. It is no more the role of the state to instil religious 
beliefs as it is the state’s role to question the validity of religious beliefs, or, similarly, political beliefs. 
We would therefore like to see religious education replaced with a new programme of study that 
allows pupils to take a more objective and religiously neutral approach to the consideration of moral 
and ethical issues (National Secular Society, 2013: 9). 
 
Importantly, while conceding that the ideas pertaining to the normative and value-
based elements of religious belief can be covered in an inclusive programme of philosophy and 
ethics, the society is clear in asserting the autonomy of public values from theological moral 
claims (National Secular Society, 2017, p. 23). 
 
Assessing the Neutralist-Liberal Conception 
The liberal the claim that the privilege conceded to Christianity in RE syllabuses and 
in the life of school violates basic standards of liberal equality by marginalising minority 
worldviews and reproducing structures of dominance deserves to be addressed. Indeed, the 
liberal objection is sound in that reflective thinking requires a polyphonic appreciation of 
accepted social values and public norms. Nevertheless, when it comes to the educative 
enterprise, it is necessary to bear in mind the experiential dimension of the process of knowledge 
acquisition, which in pragmatist philosophies are associated with the intellectual canons of a 
tradition or cultural perceptions articulated from within social activities. As John Dewey and 
Richard Rorty have noted, the immersion into social activities is a fundamental part of any 
learning effort, as it is through collective experiences that individuals acquire the resources to 
find meaning in the objects of their thinking.  
In fact, for Dewey (1929, p. 30), every science has as one of its aims to bring into 
light the “specified course of searchings, doings and arrivals, in consequence of which certain 
things have been found”. In other words, philosophical and scientific consensus are realised 
through the reconstruction of the path of historical experiences that have led each individual to 
reach distinct conclusions about a determinate object. Since those conclusions derive from 
particular “choices” regarding distinct criteria of justification, this reconstruction is necessary so 
that rational agents can evaluate each other’s findings according to the same framework of 
reasons (Dewey, 1929, p. 31). While Dewey himself contends that experience “has its equivalents 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3082
 
6 
 
in such affairs as history, life, culture”, Richard Rorty (1999), Dewey’s closest disciple, points out 
that intellectual freedom and the individual quest for the good can only take place once a process 
of socialisation that familiarises the pupils with historical narratives and social practices has been 
carried out. Even though individuation, which follows socialisation as a critical assessment of 
social practices, is the culmination of the educative process, it draws on the cultural resources of 
each language community. In other words, embeddedness in a tradition precedes social criticism.   
Dewey’s and Rorty’s position can be illustrated by Thomas Khun’s conception of 
scientific paradigms. In The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962), Kuhn explains how the 
constitutive character of language informs epistemic paradigms to the extent that – throughout 
history – human beings have formulated different views of the world realities which were 
associated with particular linguistic pre-understandings. The shift from the Ptolemaic to the 
Copernican paradigm of science, for instance, allowed Western astronomy to develop new tools 
of research and observe movements in some parts of the sky that were formerly considered as 
deprived of motion – because of the assumption that superlunary heavens were the locus of 
perfection. In contrast, he notes, the Chinese, whose cosmological worldviews did not preclude 
the possibility of celestial movement, had records of the observation of new stars in the space at 
an earlier date (Kuhn, 1962, p. 116). As Kuhn (1962, p. 113) highlights “What a man sees 
depends both upon what he looks at and also upon what his previous visual-conceptual 
experience has taught him to see  
My argument here is that the pragmatist critique of objective knowledge supports a 
tradition-oriented approach to RE, whereby practical knowledge can be enhanced through a 
syllabus that reflects and accommodates local cultural activities and pupils’ experiences of 
religious phenomena. My own view is that since those practices come to form a network of 
cooperative enterprises, Dewey’s thinking opens up possibilities for a common pursuit of 
conceptions of good life, which are informed by cultural perceptions. Although I shall distance 
myself from the non-metaphysical assumptions of pragmatist theories in the next session, 
Dewey’s and Rorty’s emphasis on culture as the foundation for any endeavour of moral and 
intellectual enquiry converges with my ethical-dialogical framework of RE.   
With this in mind, I should note that the claim that RE syllabuses, according to the 
neutralist liberal conception, should aim at covering as many religions as possible, and prioritise 
breath over depth, overlooks the experiential dimension of cognitive knowledge. As  Ninian 
Smart (1968, p. 93-94) has underscored, as with the study of philosophy or sciences, one cannot 
grasp the reasons informing the development of different religious systems of belief without 
engaging with their contents as in a personal quest. Smart contends that the arid enunciation of 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3082
 
7 
 
Plato’s teaching, for instance, would be sterile without the dialogical attitude by which one raises 
objections, establishes connections and reinterprets his propositions according to some 
particular concerns. Similarly, the history of sciences should be capable of showing the specific 
reasons why new methods and conceptions were formulated to rectify past paradigms and 
improve old techniques. Hence, it is not difficult to conclude that RE is more effective as a 
discipline when it fosters that attitude of engagement whereby the contents of religious topics 
find correspondence within the life, activities and aspirations of each believer. What is important 
to highlight is that each of these disciplines, even when presented in the form of a historical 
overview, connects cultural experiences and scientific knowledge, since the contents of the 
syllabuses draw on particular narratives, referring to a determined space-temporal cut, which 
defines what is relevant to the social and political life of that particular society. Hence, if 
philosophy classes in Western societies tend to dedicate more time to the study of Plato, Kant or 
Mill, in contrast with Eastern schools such as Confucianism or Daoism, it is probably because 
the former had a greater impact for the shaping of social and political practices in those societies. 
This does not need to entail a static perception of knowledge, as the pluralisation of Western 
societies may lead educationalists to develop a greater interest in the philosophies of the East. 
However, in order to enhance the possibilities for the understanding of alien cultural and 
intellectual standards of thinking, a practical appreciation of activities, attitudes and lifestyles that 
inform those philosophies is necessary. It would be interesting, for instance, to compare Western 
principles of individual freedom to Eastern views about the collective life, as well as the impact 
of those for conceptions of rights and justice. This may be especially valid for the consideration 
of struggles between some children and parents from an Asian background regarding the choice 
of a spouse2. In any case, the more one can draw on the experiences of pupils of different 
backgrounds, the more the orientation for mutual learning can be effective.  
For these reasons, an ethical-dialogical approach that accounts for the ways religion 
is experienced by members of the main religious traditions in the country, as well as by the 
adepts of other minority faiths in specific localities, should be preferred to a neutralist model that 
sacrifices depth for the sake of breadth. With this arrangement, the syllabus can be designed to 
address not only general ethical questions, but especially the more specific issues that concern 
the local community. Pupils will thus be able to seek mutual understanding – with the support of 
                                                           
2 A few years ago, Nancy S. Netting (2006) conducted a survey with young people of Indo-Canadian origin about 
their views on arranged marriage. Although some of them strongly rejected the practice, many held the view that 
love should not be a matter of individual choice only, as it can also be brought about afterwards, in the course of a 
relationship. As the majority of the respondents opted for a middle ground position between reworked to have 
enough here to apply individual and parental choice – with the children assenting to a pre-arranged list of 
candidates, Netting realised that the idea of one’s life as community-oriented challenges a strict account of liberal 
freedom. Here, interdependence comes up as an important determinant of individual choices.  
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3082
 
8 
 
the syllabus and the assistance of the teacher – by asking each other about the significance of 
their religious beliefs and how they may actually influence their actions. Bearing in mind the 
experiential character of learning, intercultural activities such as school trips to museums and 
temples should also be encouraged in this scheme.  
 
THE PRAGMATIST/POSTMODERN CONCEPTION 
The pragmatist/postmodern educational framework has the advantage of taking into account 
pupils’ particular experiences in faith activities as a starting point for the educative endeavour. 
Nevertheless, while this account also departs from the objectivism of liberal positions, it also 
fails to provide an epistemological or even an ontological foundation for systematic procedures 
of critical thinking and self-criticism. Indeed, with its emphasis on the individual and social utility 
of self-oriented practices, and its disregard for an all-encompassing account of public morality, 
this perspective cannot help falling into the paradox of an autonomous thinking agent that, in 
exercising its own freedom, may opt for disengagement and adopt a conservative stance on 
ethical and moral matters 
The Pragmatist/Postmodern Conception: Ireland  
  In Ireland, even though the Learn Together curriculum, taught in Educate Together 
schools, presents particular nuances, both in its propositional framework and in relation to 
distinct local practices, that make it difficult to be analysed according to specific modalities of RE 
teaching, some of its contents stand out as stances of a pragmatist/postmodern approach to 
religion. The curriculum is divided into four different strands: Moral and Spiritual, Equality and 
Justice, Belief Systems and Ethics and the Environment. While interconnected by the common 
objective of exploring different worldviews and equipping pupils with critical skills for ethical 
decisions, ‘Belief Systems’ is definitely the main strand dealing with religious matters. It was 
designed to address the main religions present in Ireland: Judaism, Hinduism, Islam, Christianity, 
Sikhism and Buddhism, discussing their origins, doctrines, symbols and celebrations.  
Importantly, in exploring each religion’s worldviews, as well as their rituals and 
practices, the students are supposed to develop an appreciation for each of them, looking for 
similarities and “common links” between these traditions. Thus, despite its aim of fostering 
critical thinking, the curriculum is rather cautious when it comes to dealing with divergent 
perspectives, as it assumes that there are overlapping elements and values that bring different 
traditions together. This trend can be observed throughout the document’s explanation of the 
goals of the ‘Belief Systems’ strand. In the first strand unit, “Introducing Key Figures in the 
Major Belief Systems”, it sets out that fifth and sixth should: “identify any common features 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3082
 
9 
 
which may exist between religious leaders, e.g. the emergence of different Christian traditions, 
the problems that arose across these traditions and the move towards closer integration” 
(Educate Together, 2004, p 36). Similarly, the second strand unit, “Rites and Ceremonies”, 
establishes that children should be enabled to “discuss the similarities and differences across the 
major belief systems in respect of ritual and ceremony and identify any common links between 
these rites” (Educate Together, 2004, p. 37). The same is true for the other two strand units, 
namely, “Celebrations” and “Beliefs and Values”, in which students should find commonalities 
among different religious festivals (Educate Together, 2004: 38), as well as across distinct code 
and value systems (Educate Together, 2004, p. 39).  
The presupposition of “common links” between different religious values and 
experiences in different traditions points to an understanding of RE practices as a means to 
promote pre-determined secular goals associated with the general appreciation of cultural 
diversity, translated into distinct forms of religious expression that, in spite of their differences, 
can equally contribute to the development of public virtues, as well as strengthen social ties 
through the creation of new relationships. It is noteworthy that, in contrast to the purport of the 
Introduction to the Primary School Curriculum (1999), which highlights that “the spiritual dimension of 
life expresses itself in a search for truth and in the quest for a transcendent element within 
human experience” (United Kingdom, 1999, p. 27), the Learn Together curriculum does not 
associate critical thinking with the quest for truth, as that word is not even mentioned in the 
document. Although bringing out concepts such as reflective thinking, and critical knowledge, it 
presents a cautious approach when it comes to religious truth and moral enquiry. In contrast, it 
tends to assume that certain conceptions of equality and human rights are the pillars upon which 
every educative endeavour is built. In fact, in an article entitled The Religious Void in Irish Education 
(2016), the CEO of Educate Together, Paul Rowe, while criticising those religious educationalists 
that claim that the absence of a strong denominational formation would lead society to a “moral 
vacuum”, points out that:  
Educate Together rejects the fundamental premise that one specific religious or 
philosophical outlook is necessary for a moral or ethical purpose or for human well-
being.  The experience of our schools has repeatedly proven the contrary.  The 
Educate Together movement has shown that once a school asserts a strong value 
system of equality and human rights and builds a school culture (or “ethos”) around 
this, it is perfectly able to engage with the full educational and social needs of pupils 
and to provide a rich, comprehensive and nourishing school experience (Rowe, 
2016). 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3082
 
10 
 
Thus, notwithstanding its accommodative stance towards the celebration of the 
cognitive and aesthetic dimensions of the religious phenomena, the Learn Together curriculum is 
ill-equipped to inform RE with the critical attitude necessary for the assessment of different 
religious perspectives of truth and moral enquiry.  
The Pragmatist/Postmodern Conception: England 
  In Britain, the multicultural provisions brought forth by the ERA did not pass 
without criticism to what some regarded as an “Anglocentric” approach to its core subjects. This 
applies not only to history and geography, where most of the bias against the contribution of 
non-English and non-Western cultures to the idea of Britishness is located, but also for subjects 
such as arts and music, which usually privilege European writers, painters, and composers. This 
was the view expressed by the authors of the report Diversity and Citizenship in the Curriculum: 
Research Review (2007), commissioned by the Department for Education and Skills (DfES). They 
noted that the National Curriculum tends to promote a sense of Britishness that is “often 
equated with Englishness (thus excluding other groups such as Scottish, Welsh and Northern 
Irish), ‘Whiteness’ and also with Christianity” (Maylor et al., 2007, p. 6). Thus, in order to 
counteract the centralising forces of a monocultural education, the curriculum should be 
reformed with a view to including minority narratives and global perspectives of the process of 
identity-construction. On the issue of RE, the report draws attention both to a mismatch 
between the descriptions taught in the classroom and pupils’ religious practices, as well as to the 
exclusion of some minority faiths, such as traditional African-Caribbean religions.  
Despite a legitimate attempt to bring about pluralism in the curriculum, the research 
relies on a constructivist perspective to highlight the fluid character of national identities and the 
problems associated with educational policies that aim to inculcate a certain set of controversial 
political values. Although the report presents a strong case for the reformulation of the History 
Curriculum, in a manner that takes account of the contribution of minorities to the country’s 
development – for instance, the authors cite Peter Fryer to point out that “whilst Asian and 
Black African and Caribbean people played a significant role in fighting both world wars, this is 
often not shown in contemporary representations” (Maylor et al., 2007, p. 55) – it does not 
articulate a deliberative framework of moral perceptions for the purpose of critical thinking. In 
fact, while assessing current perspectives on citizenship education – which in Britain is still 
diffused among different curriculum areas, including moral and spiritual education – the report 
stresses that conceiving public virtues in terms of national public values is to disregard social 
struggles for identity-renegotiation. Hence, instead of the promotion of common values and a 
shared conception of citizenship, the curriculum should emphasise “antiracism and the study of 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3082
 
11 
 
universal human rights”, while allowing for the flourishing of multicultural identities in the 
public life (Maylor et al., 2007, p. 50).  
 
Assessing the Pragmatist/Postmodern Conception 
I would like to evoke Clive Erricker’s conception of RE in order to assess 
pragmatism theories of multicultural education. Erricker (2007) spells out his postmodern 
philosophy of education through the evocation of Kierkegaard’s theology of the absurd and 
Derrida’s theory of language. As for the former, Erricker embraces the notion of God as the 
Unknown, that is, the one who lies beyond the limits of reason, in a relation of absolute 
difference, outreached from any possibility of conceptual grasp. For Erricker, Kierkegaard’s 
approach to faith as absurdity exposes the inconsistency of a rational attempt to define the 
nature of God through metaphysical reasons. On the other hand, it leads the religious person to 
acknowledge the proper character of religiosity as a performative attitude (that is, of an action 
orientated to reach the unknown), which requires interpretation and, especially, decision, from 
the agent, in processes of meaning-making. In other words, the agent has to make a choice about 
what she/he wants to believe.   
From Derrida, Erricker takes the notion of iterability, which is the re-appropriation 
of meanings in discourse acts, so as to highlight the constructive character of religious narratives. 
As individuals redefine the contents of religious doctrines according to their own perceptions 
and needs, the educator of religion must not try to convey moral teachings and/or promote fixed 
values. Instead, they should allow pupils to decide on the significance of religious narratives for 
their own lives through dialogical procedures that draw on a variety of experiences of the 
religious phenomenon.  
However, by denying the capacity of rational actors to evaluate the truth claims of 
religious propositions, Erricker brings a great deal of pragmatism to his theory. Indeed, as the 
truth is no longer at stake in the educative process, religion loses its appeal of bringing about a 
collective sense of justice and solidarity through the articulation of common ethical perceptions. 
As moral enquiry is deprived of its transcendental character, the critical purpose of normative 
discourses is eschewed in favour of a utilitarian particularism, where individual will determines 
validity according to idiosyncratic goals, while at the communitarian level, political compromises 
regulates conflicts of interest without any perspective of normative resolution.  
This pragmatist viewpoint underestimates the role of truth in directing the dialogical 
process, encapsulating social groups in their particular worldviews and precluding the expansion 
of cultural horizons. Moreover, by redirecting the moral significance of religious meanings to 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3082
 
12 
 
immanent realities, which no longer refer to the metaphysical realm, this perspective fails to take 
account of possible solutions to fundamental normative disagreements. Importantly, the 
conception of truth that I am proposing is based on Jürgen Habermas’s (2003) account of 
communicative rationality. According to this theory, democratic consensuses are constituted by 
moral claims which are analogous to the truth, to the extent that individuals can assess their 
validity in terms of a view of universal justice3. While democratic deliberation is always open-
ended, individuals cannot avoid giving a “yes”or “no” position to divergent truth and moral 
claims that may disrupt the agent’s worldview.  
Hence, bearing in mind that particular vocabularies are defined according to the 
goals of mutual understanding, a context-transcendental view of a linguistic community that 
remains open to the possibility of overcoming its own situation should guide every educative 
enterprise. For Maeve Cooke (2001, p. 14), citizens’ constant search for new semantic meanings 
that outruns justification is justified by a metaphysical perception of the recalcitrancy of reality4. 
Accordingly, it is the recalcitrancy of reality what inspires imaginative endeavours for semantic 
and normative innovation, as a permanent effort carried out by citizens with a view to bringing 
about a more perfected conception of social justice – in other words, a purely epistemic account 
of moral validity would not be able to justify the search for context-transcendental reasons 
through processes of meaning exchange with citizens from different cultural backgrounds In this 
sense, the evocation of different historical and religious narratives, rather than an aim in itself, 
should allow for the intersubjective reconstruction of scientific and moral validity claims. What is 
more, as the process of language reconstruction is truth-oriented, the outcome of moral 
deliberative procedures should allow for shifts in perceptions, leading to the reconfiguration of 
different cultures into a broader, political unity. In other words, in carrying out the assessment of 
ethical norms and truth conceptions, participants help to shape the public sphere with a 
republican sense of collective values, through advancing or abandoning their particular cultural 
or religious moral perspectives in deliberative procedures.    
                                                           
3 Habermas’s (2003, p. 237-275) theory of truth distinguishes the theoretical domain of validation from the moral 
domain, stressing that, whereas the former refers to the objective world, the latter lacks any external reference that 
could determine moral validity. However, given Habermas belief that in modern conditions of pluralism there is a 
universal imperative for the search of impartial norms of moral judgement, conceptions of normative rightness, 
which emerge as the outcome of universal discursive procedures aimed at resolving moral conflicts, are, by 
character, truth-analogous. It is important to note, here, that there is also a distinction between warranted 
assertibility – what people take to be true – and theoretical and moral truth, as a context-transcendental reference 
that outruns justification. Habermas espouses a pragmatically-realist account of truth, that is, he acknowledges that 
the objective world (theoretical truth) and the practical imperative for an impartial and universal morality (normative 
truth) is what define truth validity in a context-transcendent manner 
4 Maeve Cooke believes that Habermas embraces this view of the recalcitrancy of reality, which gives his theory a 
metaphysical purport, even though he insists on the postmetaphysical character of his communicative ethics.  
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3082
 
13 
 
It should be noted, therefore, that both the Learn Together curriculum and the 
Diversity and Citizenship in the Curriculum report err in reducing the aims of the ethical curriculum 
to the mere expression of different worldviews. In pursuing this approach, they eschew ethical 
questions of truth and moral validity, assuming that a common concern with equality and human 
rights would bring about social cohesion, despite the emergence of conflicting narratives. Indeed, 
in emphasising the idea of common links between religions, and evoking notions of human 
rights, these documents tend to assume a postmodern perspective, the orientation of which 
bears some resemblances with some protestant schools of educational thinking of the nineteenth 
century – especially those associated with Friedrich Schleiermacher’s theological framework, 
which emphasises experiences over conceptual knowledge – that allows for a view of religious 
diversity as merely linguistic versions of common human phenomena (Barnes, 2007, p. 325-326). 
This view underestimates the self-constitutive character of cultural schemes of reason, since 
different philosophical and cultural schemes cannot help but lead to incompatible moral claims.   
Conversely, it is in view of the incompatibility of cultural moral claims that the 
public school, without disregarding the need for a reflective and critical knowledge, should be 
aiming primarily at promoting truth enquiry, rather than seeking neutrality towards different 
narratives. In contemporary democracies, controversial issues regarding the field of bioethics, 
gender discrimination, and the relationship between individual and collective rights are instances 
of conflicting views of human rights, which are bound up with distinct ontological and 
epistemological assumptions. Thus, in the absence of overlapping principles of justice set out by 
aprioristic moral reasons, a merely narrativist account of moral and political values, detached 
from a common orientation to the truth of validity claims, could not bring about social cohesion. 
In seeking to assert disparate ethical claims, different cultural communities would soon realise 
that there are no common grounds for the realisation of diverse lifestyles in a single political 
community, and would likely opt for disengagement, rather than participation.  
On the extreme side of that option, is Stanley Hauerwas’s theological appropriation 
of a communitarian theory of virtue ethics. Coming himself from a protestant tradition, 
Hauerwas raises severe criticism of Christian movements that seek an alliance between the 
Church and the state. Drawing on the work of John Howard Yoder, Hauerwas sees any attempt 
at controlling the political realm in the name of religion with scepticism, as he believes that the 
needs of the state, in terms of effectiveness and security, are often incompatible with the 
required virtues of faith. In particular, he believes that once Christians are in power, they would 
need to change moral discourses in order to make concessions for those who are not formal 
members of the Church. As he notes: “servanthood and love of enemy, contentment and 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3082
 
14 
 
monogamy, cannot be expected of everyone. So, a duality develops in ethics between ‘evangelical 
counsels’ for the motivated and ‘precepts’ for everyone else” (Hauerwas, 1988, p. 122). 
Moreover, Hauerwas is especially concerned that in the impetus for saving secular governments, 
Christians may have to choose between the gospel’s orientation for self-sacrifice and the nation’s 
call for war.  For this reason, he opposes state sponsored religious activities, contending that it is 
not the task of religious citizens to try to get access to political power in order to change the 
ethos of society. Rather, they should concentrate their efforts on developing the virtues 
necessary for the realisation of their communitarian goals in the Church.  
Hauerwas’ assumptions overlook the possibilities of mutual learning that the pursuit 
of religious lifestyles in plural environments could provide for believers. In enclosing a certain 
conception of the good life, and the virtues associated with it, in a narrativist account of faith 
virtues, Hauerwas dismisses the capacity for expansion of one’s religious conceptual resources, in 
a way that allows for different understandings of how to apply gospel principles in distinct social 
contexts. From the perspective of an intersubjective reason, narratives are always in a process of 
reconstruction, making possible the actualisation of a framework of virtues according to 
conjunctural goals. Thus, just like Christians have widely abandoned the idea that slavery is a 
legitimate institution, or at least appropriate for contemporary democracies – a view that many 
slave owners in the United States used to support with biblical arguments (for example, the fact 
that St. Paul had sent a slave back to his master, Philemon, combined with a hierarchical view of 
the duties of spiritual and material service)5 – they can also question the meaning of Christ’s 
passion in different contexts for the concept of self-sacrifice. Does it mean that Christians must 
never use violence, even when there are other innocent lives at stake? Or should it be interpreted 
as a guiding principle for the avoidance of hatred and the practice of forgiveness? By engaging in 
this learning process, both religious and secular citizens can find common principles of moral 
action, inclusive by taking into consideration the possibilities of differentiated attitudes in the 
Church and in plural contexts. They can, for instance, arrive at the conclusion that violence is 
permissible – or even required – for the purpose of self-defence, but forgiveness should be 
preferred to retribution, once life threat is ruled out, and whenever national reconciliation 
                                                           
5 For more on the religious and intellectual roots of slavery issue and the American Civil War, see John P. Daly 
(2002) When Slavery was Called Freedom: Evangelicalism, Proslavery, and the Causes of the Civil War. Lexington: The 
University Press of Kentucky. The author explores both sides’ arguments on the legitimacy of slavery, pointing out 
protestants in the North and in the South shared ideas such as freedom, democracy, and prosperity, though drawing 
different conclusions from them. In the South, the conception of social gradations of service and the view of the 
redemptive character of labour, combined with a Calvinist notion of providence and the perception that 
intervention in the slavery market would be counterproductive, led prospective confederate states to the conviction 
that they were living in a virtuous society.   
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3082
 
15 
 
requires – as Desmond Tutu (1999) has demonstrated with the conception of Ubuntu in South 
Africa6. 
Thus, it is the awareness of the limits of reason, along with a transcendental attitude 
towards the truth, stemming from the acknowledgement that there is something that unifies all 
individuals in the pursuit of the good life, that binds them together in a common project of 
moral enquiry. In order to promote continuous engagements capable of producing tangible 
outcomes, the learning process should be guided by a rational orientation towards the 
possibilities of moral agreement, as well as by a critical account of religious communal goals and 
conceptions of justice. Hence, instead of a minimalist view of human rights that disregards the 
incompatibility of ethical worldviews, or a strict pragmatism that fosters association in 
communitarian activities as a self-sufficient goal, RE should provide for mutual learning through 
a universal, critical attitude of moral enquiry. Furthermore, it should allow for the reconstruction 
of cultural perceptions, so that the outcomes of moral dialogues come to shape national values 
and constitutional principles in a unifying manner. Therefore, to the same extent that two 
conflicting lifestyles, articulating different religious understandings of the idea of human equality, 
have been merged into a new constitutional framework after the American Civil War, the option 
for the logic of forgiveness over retribution may illustrate the capacity of citizens to draw on 
religious narratives to develop a collective understanding of civic virtues and a republican 
conception of justice.  
 
THE TRADITION-ORIENTED CONCEPTION 
Following Andrew Wright and Elina Hella’s (2008, p. 56) categorisation, a 
confessional education is “any form of religious education in which the learners and the 
curriculum share a common worldview”. This applies both for denominational models of RE, 
and for multidenominational models that aim to explore different forms of religious and non-
religions moralities. Importantly, this conception moves away from political liberalism in that it is 
founded upon a substantive ethical framework of political principles that articulates tradition-
constituted reasons through worldviews and cultural perceptions. Indeed, comparing RE in 
Finland and in the UK, Wright and Hella underscore that both models present a “confessional” 
approach to the extent that Christianity has a central position in the syllabuses and significantly 
shapes the national curriculum in topics related to moral and civic education. Moreover, in 
Finland, just like in the UK, pupils are supposed to learn from religious and non-religious 
worldviews for the purpose of spiritual, moral, social and cultural development. However, as 
                                                           
6 Ubuntu is a spiritual conception that emphasises togetherness and that has been influential in shaping public 
policies in South Africa after the Apartheid.   
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3082
 
16 
 
Wright and Hella (2008, p. 56) stress: “such confessionalism need not entail the uncritical 
induction of students into a worldview: since both Christianity and secular liberalism are 
internally contested worldviews, learning within each framework ought to require critical 
judgement”.  
In line with Wright and Hella’s thinking, my proposal is for a model of RE in which 
religious traditions and even secular worldviews can contribute to a process of moral learning, 
whereby – in contrast with a neutralist framework of public reason – pupils’ autonomous 
thinking in the school is promoted through the communication and evaluation of substantive 
ethical claims of justice in a critical and pluralistic manner. Nonetheless, in order to avoid 
confusion with a specific form of RE provided by religious schools, which is usually known as 
confessional, I will classify as tradition-oriented conception of RE those perspectives that 
endorse the link between substantive cultural values and educative enterprises, while making a 
distinction between the denominational model of schooling and an ethical-dialogical RE – with 
the latter referring to those multidenominational models that promote inter-faith dialogue 
through the articulation of comprehensive beliefs and experiential knowledge. Although both 
models can be linked to a tradition-oriented conception of RE, I contend that an ethical-
dialogical education is more equipped to meet the requirements of a context-transcendent 
rationality, as Maeve Cooke has defined. 
The Tradition-Oriented Conception: Ireland   
As most of the Irish primary and secondary schooling system is made up of national 
and voluntary schools under religious patronage, RE is usually provided according to a 
denominational model that has, as its primary aim, the induction of pupils in a particular faith. 
RE in Catholic Schools in Ireland follows the guidelines of the Irish Catholic Bishop’s 
Conference, as available in the document Grow in Love (2015). It sets out, as one of the desired 
outcomes of the educative process, that pupils should “acquire a sensitivity to and knowledge of 
other Christian traditions (ecumenism)”, as well as “a sensitivity to some other religious 
traditions and a basic knowledge of their principal beliefs, spiritual values and traditions (inter-
Religious Education)” (Irish Catholic Bishop’s Conference, 2015: 31).  
In other Christian schools, the programme Follow Me structures RE provisions for 
children from the Church of Ireland, Presbyterian and Methodist churches. It promotes 
knowledge and critical assessment of different religious traditions in a separate strand dedicated 
to the study of “other faiths”, where it underscores that pupils from third to sixth class are 
expected to “become aware of and sensitive to the beliefs and practices of those of other or no 
faith(s) who may be part of their school or local communities” (Board of Education, 2018).  
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3082
 
17 
 
This tension between National Curriculum guidelines and religious ethos has also 
affected those schools under Catholic patronage, as can be observed from the negative reaction 
of the Church to the National Council for Curriculum and Assessment’s (NCCA) proposal for 
an ‘Education about Religions and Beliefs and Ethics’  programme in 2015. In a consultation 
report, the NCCA acknowledged the need for a differentiated RE and Ethics education that 
would explore the nuances of theistic and non-theistic worldviews in a critical, and pluralist 
manner. Even though the document considered many possibilities when addressing topics and 
questions related to ERBE both in a separate subject and throughout the main Curriculum – 
particularly in areas such as Social, Personal and Health Education (SPHE) and Social, 
Environmental and Scientific Education (SESE) – the NCCA stressed the need for patrons to 
allow for a reflective attitude towards religious and non-religious perspectives “based on a more 
pluralist epistemology which explores different faiths and beliefs without promoting one faith 
perspective above another” (Republic of Ireland, National Council for Curriculum and 
Assessment, 2015, p. 29). Some teachers and Bishops representative of Catholic denominational 
schools expressed concerns about the feasibility of such a programme, contending that it would 
confuse pupils by delivering mixed messages regarding the authenticity of their faith.  
Currently, the best approximation of this conception of RE, which has already been 
brought into existence, can be found in Community National Schools run by Education and 
Training Boards (ETBs). Their curriculum, Goodness Me, Goodness You (GMGY) emphasises the 
constructivist dimension of the process of learning and promotes a critical view of RE through 
inter-religious dialogues, as designated by the strand ‘Beliefs and Religion’. Accordingly, it 
encourages “the sharing of personal belief experience (religious and secular) in order to enable 
children to learn ‘about’ and ‘from’ religion” (Education and Training Boards, 2016, p. 14). 
While addressing religious and non-religious traditions in a pluralistic fashion, the curriculum 
takes into consideration pupils’ background knowledge and culture, exploring a variety of 
spiritual concepts and perspectives through cooperative tasks that involve parents and faith 
communities.  
The Tradition-Oriented Conception: England   
In England, every state-funded school – voluntary aided, voluntary controlled, or 
academies (free schools that received state funds through particular contractual links with 
government) – must follow the National Curriculum. The Education Act of 2002 establishes 
that, in its general approach, the curriculum “promotes the spiritual, moral, cultural, mental and 
physical development of pupils at the school and of society, and prepares pupils at the school for 
the opportunities, responsibilities and experiences of later life”.  
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3082
 
18 
 
In voluntary-aided schools, the character of the RE syllabus and daily collective act 
of worship is determined by the governors. They are also responsible for employing the staff and 
define admission policies. In voluntary-controlled schools, those prerogatives belong to the 
LEA. As a result of a long historical process of development in these faith communities, most of 
state-funded faith schools in England are Christian or Jewish. However, there are a dozen 
Islamic-maintained schools, and a handful of Sikh and Hindu voluntary schools as well. As with 
the Catholic and the main Protestant Churches in Ireland, most of these faith schools dedicate 
parts of the RE syllabus to the study of other religious traditions.  
In voluntary-controlled schools and community schools, RE syllabus of each LEA 
reflects the official policy regarding the communitarian aspects of the educative process, which 
stems from an experiential conception of learning. For instance, the Birmingham Agreed 
Syllabus (2007) explores local features of the development of the Christian faith, while also 
taking into account children’s diverse family backgrounds in the classroom so as to include other 
religions traditions in the RE programme in view of their representation in the local community. 
Throughout the document, the role of the parents, churches and communal associations in the 
religious and ethical formation of pupils is emphasised, along with an empathetic view of the 
capacity for mutual understanding between adepts of different faiths. 
In Cornwall, the justification of the priority of Christianity over other faith traditions 
is explained in view of the fact that it articulates moral perceptions and provides a set of 
meanings that informs society’s way of life: “Christianity shapes the lives of all citizens of the 
United Kingdom irrespective of their individual beliefs. Christianity shapes our year, our 
language and our culture. It continues to inform our moral perspectives” (United Kingdom: 
Cornwall Council, 2014, p. 12). In considering the development of other faith traditions, it draws 
special attention to particular features of local groups and their historical development, 
promoting an attitude of ethical enquiry based on communal experiences. For example, whilst 
acknowledging that Buddhism is the largest non-Christian tradition in Cornwall, the document 
points out that the majority of those who identify themselves with that faith were not born into 
the Buddhist tradition. As a consequence, teachers and pupils should be questioning why that 
religion became so popular, besides looking into the links of Cornish Buddhism with other 
versions of that tradition as found in Asian contexts.  
It is also worth bringing into perspective the Hampshire, Portsmouth, Southampton 
and the Isle of Wight’s Agreed Syllabus, which was also adopted by the City of Westminster’ 
LEA, in London. It emphasises conceptual enquiry in approaching religious and spiritual themes, 
with a view to equipping children with evaluative skills through the articulation of pupils’ 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3082
 
19 
 
experiential knowledge. The syllabus mentions five key steps upon which RE is founded: 1) 
Communicate and Apply: where children draw on their experiences to present and discuss 
concepts such as community, celebration and worship – from a general apprehension to more 
particular manifestations in different religious traditions; 2) Enquire and Contextualise: where 
pupils identify differences in interpretation and begin to pose questions on meaning and 
significance; and 3) Evaluate: where they are encouraged to make judgements about the validity 
of those concepts to a meaningful way of life. As with the others, an empathetic attitude of 
learning is promoted by the Hampshire syllabus, whereby pupils are supposed to gain 
understanding about a distinct tradition by placing themselves in each other’s position. More 
specifically, though, it stresses that, in the Evaluate stage, children should be capable of carrying 
out two different procedures of assessment: one that attempts to make judgements according to 
the interlocutors’ own standards in their religious tradition, and another in which pupils ask 
themselves how those concepts and experiences can shed light on their own spiritual journey of 
enquiry (United Kingdom. Hampshire County Council, et al, 2016). 
Regarding non-state schools, in 2014, Ofsted published a report, following the 
inspection of some maintained faith schools, in which it highlighted their importance to the 
promotion of their denominational ethos through a specific routine of prayers, celebrations, and 
holidays. In Muslim schools, for example, there are usually five prayer-times distributed 
throughout the school day, while physical education can be restricted during Ramadan. In one 
Hindu school, Sanskrit classes were provided along with the National Curriculum, and all food 
provided was vegetarian (United Kingdom, Ofsted, 2014, sec. 68, 72). Yet, the document 
expressed concern about the fact that some Muslim schools “may well attempt to be creative and 
try to teach the skills within the National Curriculum within a variety of contexts”. In this regard, 
the report stressed that “inspectors may need to ask the school how the curriculum is organised 
such that the necessary skills and subjects within the National Curriculum are taught” (United 
Kingdom, Ofsted, 2014, sec. 33). In particular, it drew attention to the fact that in those schools 
“art and music can be restricted but they are still required to teach these subjects as part of the 
National Curriculum” (United Kingdom: Ofsted, 2014, sec. 42). 
In 2015, Ofsted carried out an inspection in 22 independent faith schools and found 
that at least 10 of them failed to meet the standards of the Curriculum, while four failed to 
demonstrate that they promote fundamental British values. Regarding the former, Ofsted 
stressed that those schools were not providing a sufficiently broad curriculum whereby pupils 
could develop their aesthetic and creative skills. For the latter, it was pointed out that the 
narrowness of the curriculum deprived pupils of opportunities to understand other religious 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3082
 
20 
 
traditions and beliefs. Moreover, gender issues surfaced in some Muslim schools as Ofsted found 
that men and women were set apart for the performance of ordinary tasks, while managers “were 
not protecting pupils from reading inappropriate literature about extremist, sexist or partisan 
views” (United Kingdom, Ofsted, 2015, p. 15-16). The report also raised concern about the fact 
that many children did not have basic knowledge of British history, politics and institutions, with 
very few being able to name any political parties.  
 
Assessing the Tradition-Oriented Conception 
As I have highlighted before, both the Irish and the English educational systems 
acknowledge the relevance of the religious dimension of human development and the links 
between spiritual and moral education. This particular emphasis, attributed to the relationship 
between spiritual education and community values, both at the local and at the national level, 
represents a significant departure from the neutralist approach. However, as the variety of 
experiences of RE in both countries reveals, there can be different ways of structuring the school 
curriculum which may either help or hinder intercultural learnings and dialogical criticism.  
The Irish schooling system, as currently established, is predominantly 
denominational in character, and the provision of RE is mainly under the responsibility of 
particular churches and religious organisations. According to the national Constitution, this 
arrangement is supposed to support freedom of conscience and religion, by allowing parents to 
rear their children in the faith of their choice. What is more, it points towards a general 
acknowledgement of the importance of RE for citizens – with the opt out clause being an 
exception to the norm – though structured according to different denominational perspectives. 
Whereas in Ireland denominational schooling comprises around 90% of the primary 
and secondary sectors, in England this model is confined to voluntary-aided schools, 
independent schools, and faith academies, which provide denominational teaching for one third 
of children. In fact, independent schools make up only 1% of the total number of schools in the 
country, catering for around 7% of pupils, while faith-maintained schools provide RE for around 
25% of the children. The remaining two thirds of English pupils attend maintained schools of no 
religious character which, however, offer RE classes according to the orientation of each LEA.  
As has been pointed out by Mawhinney (2007) and Fischer (2016), the Irish 
educational system is inadequate in terms of democratic pluralism in view of its reliance on 
denominational schools to attend the needs of public schooling, which results in discriminatory 
policies of enrolment and ethos enforcement. Insofar as parents of children with different 
religious or secular orientation are not given fair opportunities of choice and have their children 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3082
 
21 
 
exposed to a monological process of faith induction, liberal criticism to current state policies is 
valid to a certain point, since – even though Ireland may not be in breach of European human 
rights laws – they fail to meet the requirements of communicative rationality. .  
This does not imply, though, that the former prevents every possibility of critical 
assessment of different religious and non-religious worldviews. As the evidence above shows, 
both the Catholic Church and the Church of Ireland have been concerned with providing pupils 
with the capacity to assess truth and moral claims from different religions, which is why some 
sections of their curriculum were entirely dedicated to the study of other faith traditions. As 
Terence McLaughlin (1990) has argued, a religious rearing that does not preclude questioning 
and considerations about different perceptions of reality does not impinge on the requirements 
of liberal autonomy. Once it is acknowledged that the very process of child upbringing involves 
the imparting of particular teachings and moral values, as well as the induction in some practices 
and activities that contribute to providing children with a familiar environment of comfort and 
security, it becomes clear that a denominational schooling does not, per se, violate children’s 
basic rights7.  
However, whenever faith formation is at stake, two issues should be taken into 
account from the point view of a reflective, dialogical rationality. Firstly, the distribution of 
denominational and non-denominational schools in a particular region or country, so that 
parental rights regarding their children’s specific upbringing are secured. Indeed, bearing in mind 
the compulsory nature of primary education, the state must ensure that schools can cater for all 
children in the local community, with due regard to their parents religious and non-religious 
background. By prioritising geographical factors over religious belonging in the access to public 
education, the state can guarantee fair opportunities for democratic participation in an educative 
environment where, even though religious traditions and ethical values are not set aside, all 
pupils can engage in truth and moral enquiry both at the cognitive and at the communal level of 
practice.  
On the other hand, ETB National Community Schools provide RE according to a 
model that is broadly in line with this conception of multidenominational education. Primarily, it 
draws on pupils’ own religious background by encouraging them to involve their parents and 
religious communities in exercises that aim to explore conceptual meanings and spiritual 
experiences together with their teachers and classmates. In this sense, it does not address 
                                                           
7 McLaughlin (1990: 75-87) draws attention to the psychological aspects of the process of child-rearing, observing 
that, both at the conceptual (teaching that), and at the practical level (teaching how and teaching to), parents need to 
take a firm stance on what they believe is true and right for their children to believe and do – even though allowing 
for questioning – rather than leave them in a confused state of insecurity with hesitant and ambiguous statements.  
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3082
 
22 
 
spiritual questions from a void, and allows for some degree of subsidiarity in the treatment of 
religion with respect to parental orientation. Besides this, the GMGY curriculum promotes 
learning as an open-ended process, as it does not confine itself to a delimitated set of contents 
and topics to be covered in the classroom. Rather, it encourages teachers and students to listen 
to pupils’ own experiences in order to re-evaluate their knowledge of different religious and non-
religious worldviews.   
In England, the development of RE teaching in voluntary controlled and community 
schools offers great potential for mutual learning and dialogical criticism through the articulation 
of substantive ethical perceptions from each pupil’s faith experience. As the Birmingham and 
Cornwall syllabuses illustrate, by focusing on particular social and historical features of religious 
practice in their respective areas, RE allows for valuable insights into the reasons, values and 
concepts that different religious traditions attribute to spiritual practices and commitments, 
therefore permitting the contextual appreciation of teleological meanings and truth claims from 
those faith communities. Emphasis on the background of pupils and the encouragement of 
family involvement also ensures that spiritual learning and development begin from within the 
schemes of rationality of particular belief-systems, while including new perceptions and 
valuations in due course. 
In this vein, the Hampshire Agreed Syllabus is outstanding in its potential for 
encouraging the virtues of intercultural learning. With its approach of ‘RE as a process of 
conceptual enquiry’, it aims to explore children’s understanding of religious values, meanings and 
propositional claims, while promoting mutual criticism through an empathetic attitude of 
dialogue. The teacher is supposed to stimulate pupils to share their views on the many ways they 
conceive and experience familiar concepts – such as community, ritual and, law – as well as 
distinctive ones – for instance, Umma, Eucharist, and Torah. At the contextualising step, 
children take cognisance of stories, case studies, and testimonies that may open up their 
intellectual horizons to a different framework of meanings. In the end, during the evaluative 
stage, the teacher encourages pupils to look beyond their original contexts to see how those 
concepts and practices can shed light on their own schemes of perception. What this process 
entails is the expansion of vocabularies through the association of meanings and modes of use 
according to specific worldviews.  
With regard to denominational schools, it should be noted that an ethical-dialogical 
approach to RE requires them to take into account religious claims from distinct faiths 
communities. Thus, besides their own RE classes, which are primarily aimed at socialising (in the 
Rortyan sense) pupils into a particular spiritual tradition, they should also provide opportunities 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3082
 
23 
 
for inter-faith dialogue. Indeed, since faith narratives are constituted in reference to other 
alternative ways of conceiving worldly and spiritual realities, there is no reason to assume that 
religious communities do not have to respond to different spiritual claims to the same extent that 
they have to take into account scientific schemes of rationality. Thus, just like pupils need to be 
capable of evaluating Newton’s theory and Einstein’s theory in terms of their overall validity, so 
should they make their own assessments regarding the truth of faith beliefs. And even though 
the observer may suspend judgement at the first moment, so as to gain an insight into a different 
scheme of reasons, once they are familiar with their canons of rationality, they might conclude 
that one tradition is more fit than another for providing answers and solutions for practical or 
theoretical problems that an introspective analysis into each of them might bring to the fore. 
In this sense, a general Education about Religions and Beliefs and Ethics 
programme can be valid even for denominational schools, however the NCCA’s proposal of a 
specific subject, or cross-curricular area of development, that sets out to present religious 
contents “without promoting one faith perspective above another”, raises questions about its 
underlying philosophy. Is it meant to promote a neutralist or postmodern conception of religion 
that presupposes a common framework of political principles in the public sphere, while 
endorsing a relativistic epistemology in the private realm? Or does it actually allow for cross-
cultural learning to the extent that pupils are supposed to place themselves in each other’s 
position? If the former, then the Catholic Church is right in pointing out the incompatibility of 
the project with their own belief system and educational goals, and the proposal fails to bring 
about a dialogical attitude of truth enquiry for the reasons I have highlighted before. If the latter, 
it should be noted that reflectivity can only be fully realised in terms of substantive criticism, 
whereby the inconsistences and flaws of one tradition can be overcome by the acquisition of new 
conceptual knowledge, which, after evaluative processes, should lead social groups to arrive at an 
unifying ethical system.  
Finally, since every process of ethical enquiry starts from a particular level of 
historical knowledge, which is synthetised into a cultural tradition, independent schools, such as 
those inspected by Ofsted in 2014 and 2015, should not be exempted from engaging with their 
societies’ main traditional canons, which include scientific, moral and religious worldviews. In 
this sense, regarding the issue of gender relations, it is important to note that there is a minimal 
threshold for normative principles that allow for discursive practices to take place: if, one on 
hand, citizens may emphasise interdependence between roles, while putting into question 
notions of sameness, or even raise criticism about the sexualisation of women in sports or the 
work environment; on the other, legal norms that deny female citizens access to education, basic 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3082
 
24 
 
rights or possibilities for self-expression should not be allowed. This is because normative 
frameworks that preclude instruction and communication prevent the very process whereby 
truth claims arise and individual flourishing is achieved.  
 
CONCLUSION 
Chart I: Conceptions and Models of Religious Education 
 
Throughout this article, I have challenged the idea that an impartial, neutralist 
conception of RE is possible, or even desirable, by pointing out the links between the object of 
science and the rational subject, arguing that the observer is constrained by their own historical 
narratives and epistemic conceptions in the process of selecting and evaluate evidences. 
Afterwards, I demonstrated that multidenominational models of RE that preclude a critical 
appreciation of substantive truth and moral claims articulated by religious belief systems, fail to 
acknowledge the moral potential of their conceptual stock of meanings for bringing about 
emancipatory shifts in perception. Although the aim of RE is not to make pupils arrive at any 
particular conclusion about the value of faith contents at the school, it fosters the process 
whereby citizens develop critical capacities to make their own choices in their own time.  
Conception 
Teaching and Learning:  
a) Nature of Knowledge 
b) Content of Knowledge 
c) Ethical Position 
 
School Model 
Neutralist Liberal 
a) Cognitive  
b) Broad Ranging 
c) Impartial  
 
Non-Denominational 
Pragmatist/Postmodern 
a) Experiential  
b) Culture-Oriented 
c) Egalitarian, Immanent-
Critical  
 
Egalitarian Multidenominational  
Tradition-Oriented 
a) Experiential, Truth-
Oriented  
b) Substantive Ethics  
c) Confessional 
 
Denominational  
a) Experiential, Truth-
Oriented  
b) Substantive Ethics  
c) Discursive, Dialogical 
 
Ethical-Dialogical 
Multidenominational 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3082
 
25 
 
In order to fulfil its purpose of providing for a democratic space of ethical enquiry, 
RE in common schools must be oriented by a perspective of dialogical enquiry into the truth 
claims of different traditions. It also has to take account of social narratives and personal 
experiences in the classroom, as well as of the background knowledge of pupils. A common 
school that welcomes all members of a local community, accommodating their specific cultural 
and religious needs, and propitiating an environment of democratic deliberation, meets the 
requirements of rational accountability without violating the integrity of the moral agent through 
a reductionist account of the educative process that leaves out the experiential dimension of 
knowledge. 
 
REFERENCES 
Barnes, L. Philip (2000). Ninian Smart and the Phenomenological Approach to Religious 
Education. Religion, v. 30 (4), pp. 315-332. 
Board 
of 
Education 
(2018). 
FollowMe 
Series. 
<http://www.followme-
series.org/strands/third_to_sixth_class.php>. Access on: 12 Feb. 2018. 
Church's Backlash Blocks Change in Religion Classes. The Independent, November. 28, 2016. 
<https://www.independent.ie/irish-news/education/churchs-backlash-blocks-change-in-
religion-classes-35249798.html>. Access on: 12 Feb. 2018. 
Cooke, M. (1994). Language and Reason: A Study of Habermas’s Pragmatics. Massachusetts: 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.   
Cooke, M. (2001). Meaning and Truth in Habermas' Pragmatics. European Journal of Philosophy 9 
(1). Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 
Dewey, J. (1929). Experience and Nature. London: George Allen & Unwin, LTD.. 
Doyley, A. (2014). Educate Together is Undermining the Duty of the Irish State to Provide Non-
Denominational Schools. <atheist.ie/2014/08/educate-together-is-undermining-the-duty-of-
the-irish-state-to-provide-non-denominational-schools/>. Access on 14 Nov. 2017.  
Educate Together (2004). Learn Together: An Ethical Education Curriculum for Educate Together Schools. 
Dublin: Educate Together National Office. 
Education and Training Boards (2016). Goodness me, Goodness You!, Curriculum for Third to Sixth 
Class: Introduction and Overview. ETB, Dublin.  
Education and Training Boards (2016a). Goodness me, Goodness You!, Curriculum for Third to Sixth 
Class: Introduction and Overview. 
Education and Training Boards (2016b). Inter-Belief Dialogue, Support Materials: Beliefs and Religion. 
Education Equality (2016). Submission to the Minister for Education and Skills on the Action Plan for 
Education 
2016-2019: 
Actions 
for 
2017. 
<https://www.education.ie/en/The-
Department/Action-Plan-for-Education-2016-2019/submissions-2017/equate.pdf>. 
Access on 14 November 2017.  
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3082
 
26 
 
Elkin, F. (1969). Advertising Themes and Quiet Revolutions: Dilemmas in French Canada. 
American Journal of Sociology, v. 75, (1), pp. 112-122. 
Erricker, C. (2007). Children's Spirituality and Postmodern Faith. International Journal of Children's 
Spirituality, v.12, (1), pp. 51-60. 
European Court of Human Rights. Former Second Section (2008). Case of Hasan and Eylem 
Zengin v. Turkey. Application n. 1448/04.  
European Court of Human Rights. Grand Chamber (2007) Case of Folgerø and Others v. 
Norway. Application n. 15472/02.  
European Court of Human Rights. Grand Chamber (2011). Case of Lautsi and Others v. Italy. 
Application no. 30814/06.  
Habermas, J. (2003). Rightness versus Truth: On the Sense of Normative Validity in Moral 
Judgements and Norms. In: B. F. (Ed.). Truth and Justification. Cambridge & Oxford: 
Polity/Blackwell Publishing. 
Hauerwas, S. (1988). A Christian Critique of Christian America. Nomos, v. 30, Religion, Morality 
and the Law, pp. 110-133. 
Hella, E. & Wright, A. (2008). Learning ‘about’ and ‘from’ Religion: Phenomenography, the 
Variation Theory of Learning and Religious Education in Finland and the UK. British 
Journal of Religious Education, v.31, (1), pp. 53-64. 
Humanist Association of Ireland (2011). Submission to the Irish Human Rights Commission on 
Education 
and 
Religion 
from 
the 
Humanist 
Association 
of 
Ireland. 
<https://www.ihrec.ie/download/pdf/reledsub23.pdf>. Access on 14 November 2017 
Humanist UK (2017). Religious Education. <https://humanism.org.uk/campaigns/schools-and-
education/school-curriculum/religious-education/>. Access on 15 November 2017 
Hursthouse, R. (1991). Virtue Theory and Abortion. Philosophy and Public Affairs, v. 20 (3), pp. 
223-246. 
Irish Catholic Bishop’s Conference (2015). Grow in Love, Primary School RE Syllabus: Introduction. 
Veritas. 
Irish Catholic Bishop’s Conference (2015). Grow in Love, Primary School RE Syllabus: Introduction. 
Veritas. 
Kuhn, T. (1962). The Structures of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago: The University of  
MacLaughlin, T. H. (1990). Parental Rights in Religious Upbringing and Religious Education within a 
Liberal Perspective. London: Institute of Education. 
Maylor, U. et. al. (2007). Diversity and Citizenship in the Curriculum: Research Review. Research 
Report n. 819. London: Metropolitan University. 
National Secular Society (2013). Religious Education. <www.secularism.org.uk/uploads/religious-
education-briefing-paper.pdf>. Access on: 15 Nov. 2017. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3082
 
27 
 
National Secular Society (2017). Rethinking Religion and Belief in Public Life: A Manifesto for Change. 
<www.secularism.org.uk/uploads/rethinking-religion-and-belief-in-public-life-a-
manifesto-for-change.pdf>. Access on 15 Nov. 2017. 
Republic of Ireland. National Council for Curriculum and Assessment (2015). Education about 
Religious and Beliefs (ERB) and Ethics in the Primary School: Consultation Paper. 
<https://www.ncca.ie/media/2045/consultation_erbe.pdf>. Access on: 15 Feb. 2018. 
Rorty, R. (1989). Contingency, Irony and Solidarity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Rorty, R. (1990). Truth and Freedom: A Reply to Thomas McCarthy. Critical Inquiry, v. 16 (3), pp. 
633-643. 
Rorty, R. (1999). Education as Socialization and as Individualization. In: R. R (Ed.). Philosophy and 
Social Hope: New York, Penguin. 
Rowe, P. (2016). The Religious Void in Irish Education. Educate Together Blog. 
<https://www.educatetogether.ie/blog/religious-void-irish-education>. Access on 15 
November 2017 
Smart, N. (1968). Secular Education and the Logic of Religion. New York: Humanities Press  
Tutu, D. M. (1999). No Future Without Forgiveness. London: Rider. 
United Kingdom. Birmingham City Council (2007). Agreed Syllabus for Religious Education. 
<https://servicesforeducation.co.uk/files/Learning%20&%20Assessment/Subject%20Su
pport/RE/Birmingham_Agreed_Syllabus_for_Religious_Education_2007.pdf>. 
Access 
on: 15 Feb. 2018. 
United 
Kingdom. 
Cornwall 
Council 
(2014). 
Cornwall 
Agreed 
Syllabus. 
< 
https://www.cornwall.gov.uk/media/9227047/Agreed-syllabus-2014.pdf>. Access on:  
United Kingdom. Department for Education (1999). Religious Education and Collective Worship: 
Circular number 1/94. London: Department for Education Publications Centre. 
United Kingdom. Hampshire County Council, et al (2016). Living Difference III: The Agreed Syllabus 
for 
Hampshire, 
Portsmouth, 
Southampton 
and 
the 
Isle 
of 
Wight. 
<www.newchurchprimaryschool.co.uk/homepage_pdf_links/Living%20Difference.pdf>. 
Access on: 15 Feb. 2018. 
United Kingdom. Ofsted (2014). Inspecting Faith Schools, Briefing for Section 5 Inspection. Ref. n. 
100142. <www.ofsted.gov.uk/resources/100142>. Access on: 12 Feb. 2018. 
United Kingdom. Ofsted (2015). Advice note from Sir Michael Wilshaw, Her Majesty’s Chief Inspector, 
on The Inspection of Schools Previously Inspected by the Bridge Schools Inspectorate. 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/4791
22/HMCI__advice_note_BSI.pdf>. Access on: 12 Feb. 2018. 
Watson, J. (2007). Humanism in Agreed Sullabuses for Religious Education: A Report to the British 
Humanist Association. <https://humanism.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/Watson-Syllabus-
Report.pdf>. Access on 15 November 2017. 
 
AUTHOR’S CONTRIBUTIONS 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3082
 
28 
 
Tarcísio Amorim Carvalho: author of the text  
 
DECLARATION OF CONFLICTS OF INTEREST 
The authors indicate that they have no conflict of interest for this article. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3082
This preprint was submitted under the following conditions: 
The authors declare that they are aware that they are solely responsible for the content of the preprint and
that the deposit in SciELO Preprints does not mean any commitment on the part of SciELO, except its
preservation and dissemination.
The authors declare that the necessary Terms of Free and Informed Consent of participants or patients in
the research were obtained and are described in the manuscript, when applicable.
The authors declare that the preparation of the manuscript followed the ethical norms of scientific
communication.
The submitting author declares that the contributions of all authors and conflict of interest statement are
included explicitly and in specific sections of the manuscript.
The authors agree that the approved manuscript will be made available under a Creative Commons CC-BY
license.
The deposited manuscript is in PDF format.
The authors declare that the data, applications, and other content underlying the manuscript are
referenced.
The authors declare that the manuscript was not deposited and/or previously made available on another
preprint server or published by a journal.
If the manuscript is being reviewed or being prepared for publishing but not yet published by a journal, the
authors declare that they have received authorization from the journal to make this deposit.
The submitting author declares that all authors of the manuscript agree with the submission to SciELO
Preprints.
The authors declare that the research that originated the manuscript followed good ethical practices and
that the necessary approvals from research ethics committees, when applicable, are described in the
manuscript.
The authors agree that if the manuscript is accepted and posted on the SciELO Preprints server, it will be
withdrawn upon retraction.
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
