Introduction. Luria's theory allows the analysis of psychological development after brain injury, both in adults and children. Objective. To analyze the content of a group of articles where the evaluation of the preschool child has been carried out from Luria's theory in order to relate it to the foundations of early childhood education. Methodology. The selection of articles was made considering several search equations, from 2015 to 2022, coming from eight databases: SCOPUS, WOS, SCIELO, PUBMED, DIALNET, LATINDEX, SCIENCEGATE, EBSCO. Results. The experience of Luria and his followers has allowed him to work with neuropsychological factors as indicators to assess neurological alterations in man, although the review of the articles has allowed us to conclude that Luria's contributions are related to the objectives of early childhood education: an assessment with an integral approach. From this perspective, the authors of the article propose five executions to analyze the integral development of the preschool child. Conclusions. Luria's theory can be used in early childhood education to carry out the assessment of the preschool child with an integral approach.
In the last 10 years, research in early childhood has recognized several theoretical and methodological shortcomings in order to manage the educational process with quality and commitment to the development and education of the child and the family. (1-9) This occurs not only because of the increase in the demands of improvement, but also because of the need to prepare the educators, the family and the educational agents involved. With respect to evaluation, it is important to highlight that it is a topic that is being updated, both in Cuba and in other regions of Latin America. (10,11) Several authors from the region(10-14) , emphasize the need to review the topic in preschool children, as it shows its importance in directing the child's educational process and preparing him/her for the next school stage. Likewise, they state that evaluation in the educational process of preschool children is a reflective, systematic and rigorous process of inquiry for decision making.
In Cuba, the cultural-historical approach is the theoretical and methodological basis for the evaluation of integral development in early childhood educational practice. From this approach, in the educational sciences, forms of evaluation, methods and procedures for early childhood have been declared, which are summarized in the documents of the improvement.
However, there are limitations in the knowledge of how to do it in educational practice. In particular, educators fragment the evaluation of integral development into areas of development, which limits their actions to certain contents and ignores the fact that it is integral. For example, in a motor skills or physical education activity, the motor skills dimension is evaluated, ignoring other skills and knowledge of the child, such as the identification of objects by name, size and color, the way of communicating with the educator and other children, and the final evaluation of the activity, culminating with an appreciation of the child's values.
A theoretical systematization of the cultural-historical approach made it possible to gather the main Russian authors who have worked on assessment from an integral perspective, and as a result the research selected Luria's proposal due to four reasons. First, Luria put into practice the three principles of the approach:
- The social genesis of higher mental functions: he elaborated tasks and tests using objects, data, concepts, values, norms and attitudes of the historical reality and culture of Russia.
- Higher mental functions are organized as a system: he elaborated neuropsychological factors to analyze higher mental functions, for example, he considered that the execution of a motor action contains skills, knowledge and habits of other functions; therefore, in that action several contents can be evaluated.
- The higher mental functions are organized and localized in the nervous system dynamically and as a system: formed by the three functional units to study the cerebral localization of the higher mental functions in man.
Second, the results obtained by Luria were starting points for the theoretical reviews of several early childhood researchers in Russia, such as F.I Yudovich, L. Venguer, A.V. Zaporozhetsz, Z. Neverovich, A.N. Leontiev, D.B. Elkonin. Third, he presented three functional units as explanatory categories for conducting the assessment with a holistic perspective. Fourth, he offered a system of methods and procedures for conducting assessment with a holistic perspective, based on observation and neuropsychological factors as indicators.
The achievements of Luria's model are important for evaluating and rehabilitating patients with neurological injuries; however, his research was limited to the adult brain-injured population and exclusively for the clinical setting. In this sense, the present review starts from a scientific question: can the methods and procedures used by Luria be applied to the evaluation of integral development in the educational process of preschool children?
In order to answer this question, this research proposes to analyze the content of a group of articles where the evaluation of preschool children has been carried out from Luria's theory in order to relate it to the foundations of early childhood education. The analysis is based on Gowin's V methodology, which consists of four elements to be considered: research topic, questions to be answered, concepts, principles and theories to be used, and procedures to be followed.
A literature review was carried out to meet the objective of the study. The selection of the articles was made considering three criteria: the topic, child assessment in preschool infancy; an equation to select the articles in the different database, "assessment AND preschool AND neuropsychology", "assessment AND preschool AND Luria", "preschool AND neuropsychology" "preschool AND Luria"; years and languages of publication, from 2015 to 2022, in Spanish and English; type of database, coming from eight databases, SCOPUS, WOS, SCIELO, PUBMED, DIALNET, LATINDEX, SCIENCEGATE, EBSCO. In addition, the selection considered two actions to refine the search, first, check directly in the Luria Journal for being a Russian journal that is not registered in any of the mentioned databases, and second action, perform an advanced search in the academic google to include journals indexed in SCOPUS and WOS, because the authors do not have funding to access directly to these databases. Finally, 36 articles were selected (see Table 1).
The content analysis of the articles was carried out using Gowin's V technique. (15) According to this methodology, the following questions were posed to identify the most relevant aspects of each article: what is the purpose of evaluation in preschool children according to Luria's theory? What to assess according to Luria's theory, and How to do it?
According to Luria, the evaluative methods of his theoretical model are necessary to identify, diagnose and rehabilitate the defect after a brain injury, however, in the infant population the information can be very valuable in directing the child's education, development and learning.
The articles reviewed in Table 1 use the information to obtain a profile of weaknesses and strengths in the child's development, and on that basis diagnose and suggest stimulation. However, the authors' intention is reduced to the analysis of the child, and the assessment of the group, where the learner plays and receives developmental influences, is deficient. In addition, the evaluation is based on the results of the tasks applied and the systematic analysis with the criteria of the family and other educational agents and agencies is insufficient.
The above shows that research with Luria's theory, in both adults and children, has been oriented towards the personal analysis of the defect and consequently a personalized diagnosis and rehabilitation. From the educational sciences, the educator directs her analysis towards the integral development of the child, and in turn, towards the group to organize her educational work, and thus accelerate or slow down the pace to conduct the educational process. In this way, the educator uses the evaluation information not only for diagnostic purposes, but also with formative intentions, directed towards the child, the group and the family.
Another important point, Luria's contributions, defend the idea of information feedback, i.e., several criteria from different sources confirm a weakness or a strength in the subject. To take an example, the educator observes in the institution if the child draws concentrated in his activity, if he holds the pencil well, executes the actions according to the indicated orientation and if he enjoys the activity, however, the educator has the obligation to ask the parents: if the child picks up the toys when instructed, if he eats slowly and uses the utensils, if he bathes or dresses himself, or if he plays with a partner respecting the rules, with respect, affection and companionship. The triangulation of information between the educator and the family is a valuable tool in the educational process, since the educator identifies and verifies the needs of the child and the family, and thus directs her educational work from this result and in correspondence with the objects outlined.
From this perspective, in the educational sciences, the information obtained from evaluative methods has a diagnostic, evaluative and formative function. Diagnostic due to the need to identify needs and potentialities of the child, as referred to in the reviewed articles that use Luria's theory, but also, the needs of the group, the family and the educational agencies related to the child's education are identified. From this statement, the evaluative function of the assessment is recognized, since the criteria of the family and educational agencies are important to define the child's needs, education and development.
The evaluation has a formative function because the decision-making in the educational process, for its improvement, is oriented towards the education and development of the learner, but also towards the education of the family and their ways of acting at home, as well as the preparation towards the educational agencies.
The observation of several neurological patients allowed Luria to distinguish a field of science that has been enhanced since the late 90's of the last century. Previously, these neurological patients were analyzed from organic psychophysiology, i.e., the analysis was oriented towards brain reflexes to explain their behavior; however, it failed to analyze these reflexes in human activity. In this sense, Luria recognizes the importance of the psychophysiology of activity, which is directed not to breathing as an unconditioned reflex, but rather to how the subject uses breathing in his own activity: in sports, in singing, in swimming. (16)
From this position, the psychophysiology of activity or neuropsychology arises as a discipline to analyze and explain the higher mental functions of man in his activity after a brain injury.
This shows that the analysis of psychophysiology in man can take two directions: organic psychophysiology aimed at explaining brain functioning, and activity psychophysiology aimed at describing and explaining the mental processes underlying human actions. Both directions are grouped in cognitive neuroscience, a branch of knowledge that deals with the scientific study of the biological mechanisms underlying cognition, with a specific focus on the neural substrates of mental processes and their behavioral manifestations.
To the question what to evaluate, Luria answers that the defect or symptom underlying a brain injury, and that symptom limits the functioning of mental processes as a whole and is expressed in a syndrome. (16) Luria recognized the neuropsychological factors of various syndromes to explain the mental processes affected after brain injury, and defined the neuropsychological factor as a link that integrates psychological systems, human activity, and brain functioning. Such factors underlie a given action or activity and are responsible for the defect in the face of brain injury.
Thus, for example, it is understood that the "simultaneous spatial synthesis" factor, also called visuospatial, is responsible for locating in space the motor actions up or down, right or left, deep or superficial, therefore, lesions in the brain areas involved in this function disable or limit the execution of tasks or activities such as writing, changing lines when reading, throwing a ball to the right place, copying a drawing.
With this theoretical model, several authors (17-27) have analyzed the development, learning and maturation of the nervous system in the infant population, and have recognized a group of scientific achievements to use Luria's model in infant assessment:
- Neuropsychological factors reflect the functioning of the child's brain mechanisms and are adequate methodological foundations for assessing mental and neurological development in the child population.
- Luria's behavioral tests or tasks, designed to assess neuropsychological factors in adults, can be adapted for children.
- Luria's model offers theoretical and methodological tools to carry out the evaluation with an integral perspective, the rehabilitation or correction of the defect in the child population.
Based on these achievements, Luria's model is a theoretical and methodological support of significant importance in the medical and psychological sciences to analyze the development in the child population, as it offers tools for evaluation and rehabilitation in these ages. (28-32) However, its application is limited in the educational sciences, its contributions are used in special education, aimed at the analysis and rehabilitation of the defect.
Although Luria's theory has significant utility in the medical and psychological sciences and in special education, the authors of the article emphasize its potential use in preschool education, primarily in the assessment of the comprehensive development of the preschool child. In preschool education, Luria's theory may be significant because:
- a specialist in neuropsychology, and based on Luria's theory, recognizes the actions of man to analyze the psychophysiology of the activity; however, the educator can also observe the actions of the child, although to assess his or her integral development. In other words, a specialist using neuropsychology observes a child's drawing to analyze neuropsychological factors and issue a criterion on the maturation of brain regions involved (36) , while the educator observes the drawing to analyze motor skills, the relationship with objects, the child's personal involvement with what he/she draws, the values and habits that can be reflected in the drawing, concentration and compliance with the objectives set by the educator.
- The tests proposed by Luria in the 20th century can be adapted in preschool childhood to assess motor skills, language, memory, lateralization of functions and thinking.(30, 31) For example, Luria used, as an evaluation task, the learning of 10 words in 5 trials to assess the psychophysiological functioning of the temporal lobe and its connection with subcortical structures; however, in education it can be used to assess the development of the child's memory and its ability to learn a song, to remember the name of objects and verbal commands, as well as to follow a route of actions outlined by the educator to meet a goal.
- Stage activities can be used as an object of evaluation, such as storytelling, drawing and didactic games at the table. (30, 31) This is a foundation of the cultural-historical approach and Leontiev's activity theory. (32)
From this perspective, the way of analyzing activity (neuropsychological factors) and the use of the evaluative methods proposed by Luria can be used in preschool education. Psychological sciences use Luria's theory as a basis for the evaluation of the child with neurodevelopmental disorders, and in this sense, the use of neuropsychological factors is essential to explain the maturation of brain regions involved in the mental development of the child. However, the science of education uses the contents of neuropsychological factors to analyze the conceptual, attitudinal and procedural contents in preschool childhood, which are pedagogical foundations in that education, and allow directing the educational process with a comprehensive approach.
However, how to do this in educational practice will clarify the difference between psychological and educational approaches.
To carry out the evaluation, Luria developed a methodology based on three methods: observation, interview and specific tasks to assess the way to solve it. This methodology is divided into two parts, the structural analysis of the defect and the analysis of the psychological processes underlying the defect. (16)
According to Luria, the neuropsychologist should identify the main defect through an in-depth interview about the subject's life (habits, skills, knowledge, lifestyle), but at the same time, he suggests applying some simple tasks to verify what the subject says. For example, the examiner gives verbal commands for the subject to execute "with your right hand, touch your left ear". In this way, you observe whether the subject is able to follow and comply with the verbal order during the process and for this you should rely on neuropsychological factors, such as verbal retention and programming - control of conscious actions. However, other factors should continue to be analyzed, since it should be observed if the correct hand was selected and if it was correctly oriented in space (visuospatial organization of the motor act; sequential motor organization; programming and control of the motor act).
Undoubtedly, this interview is more sensitive for subjects with severe or moderate neurological damage than for a subject with a slight alteration, therefore, Luria elaborated tasks specifically for each mental process in order to deepen and specify the defect. It is appropriate to recognize that in Luria's method two essential elements of the assessment can be observed: observing and analyzing activities of daily living; and using specific tasks to verify and specify the defect (16). However, Luria conceived the assessment for the brain-damaged adult population and not for the child population. In this sense, Mangas and Ramos (30), Solovieva and collaborators (31), made an adaptation of Luria's proposal to be applied in preschool children.
Behind the intention of Luria and his followers, there is a method that answers the question: how to perform the evaluation? The answer is: through observation, interview and specific tests, and analyzing the contents from neuropsychological factors as indicators to interpret the actions of man and the neurological damage caused. However, taking this question to the science of education would exclude the vision of syndromic analysis and would guide the educator in the assessment of the child's integral development through evaluative methods used by her (observation and pedagogical situations).
In the educational sciences it is necessary to use indicators to analyze the actions of the learner on a material and symbolic level, and thus to assess, diagnose and make decisions about the child's integral development. The authors of the article take from Luria the contents of the neuropsychological factors to elaborate interpretation indicators, but using the term "executions" and avoiding the term neuropsychological factors. The term "executions" is used because the intention is to assess the actions underlying the child's activity and not his psychophysiological functioning. In the group, the preschool child is either playing freely with other children or is being directed by the educator; in both spaces, observation is the educator's fundamental method for assessing the development achieved by the learner. However, the activity of the educator must be specified in order to carry out the evaluation with a comprehensive approach. The observation should be oriented towards five executions:
- Motor performance: Preferential hand for performing actions or recognizing objects by touch. Pencil or color grip. Finger position and grip when holding an object or performing actions. Speed, coordination and the quality of dressing, eating, bathing on one's own and performing physical education exercises. Facial gestures as indicators to analyze the organs of language: mimics, cheek puffing, laughter and the use of the tongue to speak, make animal sounds or trumpeting.
- Intellectual performance: Ability to perform synthesis and analysis in a given or oriented situation. Grouping objects by color, shape, size. Construction with objects, images or drawn figures. How he/she organizes ideas when making a narrative or story. How and with what intensity he/she makes comparisons of objects by characteristics (similarities - differences) or by quantities (bigger - smaller). Speed and quality when making enumeration and comparisons of quantities between 1 and 10 objects.
- Communicative executions: Ability to execute actions after verbal direction, as told. Directing motor actions through language. Before executing what to do: language directs the action.
- Motivated executions: Maintain motivation during the actions and directed by a goal. Having a high concentration in the actions and for a prolonged time depending on the activity.
- Spatial executions: Location and size of drawings and figures on paper or on the blackboard. Right - left, up - down, deep - shallow orientation of both motor and perceptual actions. Organizing toys, clothes or other objects in a delimited space.
Undoubtedly, behind these executions are the achievements of the stage, and in turn, the actions that underlie any activity of the child. Thus, the how of evaluation in the educational sciences is oriented towards two points: through evaluative methods used in the educational process and through the use of executions to specify observation and direct stimulation.
The literature analyzed suggests that Luria's theory can be used in early childhood education, particularly in the evaluation of the integral development of preschool children. The contents of neuropsychological factors can be included in the contents of early childhood education to assess the child in an integral way, to elaborate indicators or to specify the method of observation in the activities carried out in the educational process.
The use of the executions by the educators allows directing the observation towards the pencil grip when drawing, the position and strength of the fingers when making the grip, the hand with greater preference for executing the activities, concentration and enjoyment. The executions come from an in-depth review of Luria's neuropsychological factors, and the intention is to analyze the integral development of the child from the educational sciences: skills, knowledge and values of the stage to direct the educational process with quality and prepare the child and the family for the next education.