Publication status: Not informed by the submitting author
ENGLISH TEACHING FOR BLIND STUDENTS: ADAPTATION
SUGGESTIONS FOR DIDACTIC ACTIVITIES OF A TEXTBOOK
Fernanda Luisa Brixius, Helena Vitalina Selbach, Patrícia Marcuzzo
https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4455
Submitted on: 2022-07-19
Posted on: 2022-07-26 (version 1)
(YYYY-MM-DD)
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 
ENGLISH TEACHING FOR BLIND STUDENTS: ADAPTATION SUGGESTIONS FOR 
DIDACTIC ACTIVITIES OF A TEXTBOOK 
 
FERNANDA LUISA BRIXIUS1 
ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2995-3804 
HELENA VITALINA SELBACH2 
ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9957-8328 
PATRÍCIA MARCUZZO3 
ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0014-929X 
 
 
ABSTRACT: The purpose of the present work is to present adaptation suggestions of activities from 
an English language textbook, to be used by blind students in the sixth year of Basic Education. In this 
qualitative research, inscribed in the area of Applied Linguistics, we sought to provide a Review of 
Literature on research about the adaptation of materials for blind students, which comprised our previous 
studies. Highlights of themes approached include the lack of research and of adapted materials for blind 
students, the lack of preparation of teachers to deal with the specificities of those students and problems 
in the development of autonomy and inclusion of blind students in class. In addition, we searched on 
those studies for understanding and ideas of methodologies and adaptations of didactic materials for the 
proposals developed in the English field. In a second moment, the sixth grade English textbook most 
chosen by public schools in Santa Maria in 2021, entitled “Way to English for Brazilian Learners - 6” 
(FRANCO; TAVARES, 2015), was analyzed. Furthermore, the analysis of the textbook revealed that the 
most relevant section to be adapted is the “Vocabulary Corner”, which encompasses vocabulary activities 
referring to all units of the book. After this process, adaptations for six activities in the book were 
suggested, built on the basis of the Literature Review, in order to make them inclusive and accessible for 
blind students. 
 
Keywords: blind students, English language, teaching, adaptation. 
 
 
ENSINO DE INGLÊS PARA ESTUDANTES CEGOS: SUGESTÕES DE ADAPTAÇÃO PARA ATIVIDADES 
DE UM LIVRO DIDÁTICO 
 
RESUMO: O objetivo do presente trabalho é apresentar sugestões de adaptação para atividades de um 
livro didático de Língua Inglesa (LI), para serem utilizadas por alunos(as) cegos(as) do sexto ano do 
Ensino Fundamental. Nesta pesquisa qualitativa, inscrita na área da Linguística Aplicada, buscou-se 
realizar uma Revisão de Literatura sobre pesquisas em adaptação de materiais para alunos(as) cegos(as), 
as quais compuseram os estudos prévios. Destacam-se temas como a falta de pesquisas e materiais 
adaptados para esse público, o despreparo dos professores para lidar com as especificidades desses(as) 
alunos(as) e problemas no desenvolvimento da autonomia e da inclusão de alunos(as) cegos(as) nas aulas. 
Além disso, buscamos, nesses estudos, compreensão e inspiração sobre metodologias e adaptações de 
materiais didáticos para as propostas a serem desenvolvidas na área de LI. Em um segundo momento, 
foi analisado o livro didático de LI do sexto ano mais escolhido por escolas públicas de Santa Maria/RS 
 
1 Universidade Federal de Santa Maria. Santa Maria, Rio Grande do Sul (RS), Brasil. <fernanda.brixius@gmail.com> 
2 Universidade Federal de Pelotas. Pelotas, Rio Grande do Sul (RS), Brasil. <helena.selbach@ufpel.edu.br> 
3 Universidade Federal de Santa Maria. Santa Maria, Rio Grande do Sul (RS), Brasil. <patimarcuzzo@yahoo.com> 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4455
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
em 2021, intitulado “Way to English for Brazilian Learners - 6” (FRANCO; TAVARES, 2015). Ademais, 
a análise do livro didático revelou que a seção mais relevante a ser adaptada é denominada “Vocabulary 
Corner”, por englobar atividades de vocabulário referentes a todas as unidades do livro. Após esse 
processo, foram sugeridas adaptações para seis atividades do livro, construídas com base na Revisão de 
Literatura, com o intuito de torná-las inclusivas e acessíveis também para alunos(as) cegos(as). 
 
Palavras-chave: alunos cegos, Língua Inglesa, ensino, adaptação. 
 
 
ENSEÑANZA DE INGLÉS PARA ESTUDIANTES CIEGOS: SUGERENCIAS DE ADAPTACIÓN A 
ACTIVIDADES DE UN LIBRO DIDÁCTICO 
 
RESUMEN: El presente trabajo tiene como objetivo presentar sugerencias de adaptación para 
actividades de un libro didáctico de Inglés, para ser utilizadas por alumnos(as) ciegos(as) del sexto año de 
la Escuela Primaria. En esta investigación cualitativa, inscrita en el área de la Lingüística Aplicada, buscó 
lograr una Revisión Literaria sobre investigaciones en adaptación de materiales para alumnos ciegos, 
cuáles hacen parte de los estudios previos. Destaca temas como la falta de investigaciones y materiales 
adaptados para alumnos ciegos y también la falta de preparación de los maestros para manejar con los 
detalles de estos alumnos y los problemas en el desarrollo de la autonomía y de la inclusión de alumnos 
ciegos en las clases. Además, buscamos en estos estudios comprensión e inspiración sobre metodologías 
y adaptaciones de materiales didácticos para las propuestas que van a ser desarrolladas en el área de la 
Lengua Inglesa. Luego, fue analizado el libro didáctico de Inglés del sexto año más elegido por las escuelas 
públicas de Santa Maria, RS, en 2021, nombrado “Way to English for Brazilian Learners - 6” (FRANCO; 
TAVARES, 2015). Todavía, el análisis del libro didáctico ha revelado que la sección más necesita 
adaptación es llamada “Vocabulary Corner”, la cual abarca actividades del vocabulario referentes a todas 
las unidades del libro. Después de ese proceso, fueron sugeridas adaptaciones para seis actividades del 
libro, hechas con base en la Revisión Literaria, con el intuito de hacerlas inclusas y accesible también para 
alumnos(as) ciegos(as). 
 
Palabras clave: alumnos ciegos, Inglés, enseñanza, adaptación. 
 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4455
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION4 
 
Teaching an additional language is a challenging and demanding task since teachers need to 
be aware of the necessity to create a safe and productive environment, in which students feel comfortable 
to express themselves, creating a good rapport (HUGHEY, 2011). The main purpose of an additional 
language class is to make students think about and use language critically by means of engaging 
themselves in multimodal genres so that they comprehend language as “constitutive of situated social 
practices” (MOTTA-ROTH, HEBERLE, 2015, p. 2).  
In order to be comprehended by sighted students, teachers of English as an Additional 
Language (EAL) usually make use of visual materials, such as pictures, photos, videos, flash cards, maps 
and posters. Although these materials act as realia and help learners to understand the English language, 
they need adaptation to be used by non-sighted students. These students require a tangible or audible 
exemplar of the didactic material, which can be examined through other senses (RESOURCES FOR 
TEACHING ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE TO LEARNERS WITH BLINDNESS OR 
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT, 2022). 
Even though the Brazilian Education Ministry provides adaptations in Braille textbooks 
available from the National Textbook Program (Programa Nacional do Livro Didático – PNLD5) and 
required by schools, it is important for the teachers to be familiar with other adapted materials, in order 
to be able to choose the best method according to the students’ abilities and learning styles. Such 
adaptations are meaningful not only for blind students, who will be included in activities they would not 
be able to participate otherwise, but also for teachers, as they can explore different materials that may 
work for the whole group, either sighted or non-sighted learners. 
Through searching on journal platforms for works concerning the EAL learning-teaching 
process of blind students, it is possible to observe the lack of discussion of this theme within the Applied 
Linguistics area, which indicates the lack of research on the theme and also interferes in the teachers’ 
search for forms of adaptations. Such an issue reinforces the importance of conducting research on 
adapted didactic materials for blind students, exposing tangible and audible options to be used for that 
audience.  
The aim of this study is to present adaptations for didactic activities of the most used 
textbook in Santa Maria, RS, in 2021, used by sixth graded blind students. To do so, a Review of 
Literature was conducted, regarding previous works on teaching and learning process of blind students. 
Based on the results of this research, an adaptation of selected didactic activities headed to blind students 
is then suggested. Before discussing those forms of adaptations, we present, in the following sections, 
the national inclusion of the non-sighted people in social and educational contexts by debating some 
historical perspectives on national legislation and historical landmarks, as well as the main perspectives 
on the teaching of blind students.  
 
Historical landmarks: Legislation and Speeches on Disability 
 
Presently, many types of physical, mental and sensorial impairments are broadly known and 
discussed in Brazil, along with the education of impaired students. However, not long ago, those students 
used to be addressed by means of pejorative and discriminative terms. Until the 1970’s, people with any 
disability were segregated from society and deprived of their rights, such as to receive a proper education. 
Nationally, the situation started changing in the 60’s and 70’s decades, with the creation of the first Law 
of Guidelines and Bases of National Education and of the National Center for Special Education 
 
4The data, reviews and conclusions of this paper were published in the first author’s final graduation work, supervised by the 
second and third authors. The graduation work has not been published as a paper in a journal. 
5Plano Nacional do Livro Didático (PNLD), which stands for National Textbook Program, is a program created by the 
Brazilian Ministry of Education, in order to evaluate and provide didactic and literary books to basic and infant educational 
institutions in Brazil. Retrieved from: <http://portal.mec.gov.br/component/content/article?id=12391:pnld>. Access on: 
Jul. 17, 2022. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4455
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(CENESP)6, which began to regularize, respectively, the “normalization”7 of people with disability and 
their right to education (ALVES, 2017, p. 15). Since then, three other laws regarding guidelines and bases 
of national education emerged: Law 4.024/61 (1961), concerning education and ensuring the Brazilian 
population the right to schooling; Law 5.692 (1971), establishing guidelines and bases for high school 
education, among other measures; and Law 9.394/96 (1994), which is current, asserting the 
responsibilities of the governments (municipal, state and federal) with the three Brazilian educational 
stages (preschool, primary school and high school).  
Globally, the 90’s decade witnessed significant landmarks in favor of people with 
impairments. The World Declaration on Education for All asserted that every single person has the right 
to education and must have access to basic conditions of learning (UNESCO, 1990). In 1994, the 
Salamanca Statement was announced by the United Nations to ensure social and educational inclusion, 
stating that people with special needs must receive equal education, regardless of any limitation 
(FIGUEIREDO; KATO, 2015).  
From 2000 onwards, other laws and decrees were proclaimed in Brazil. The most relevant 
ones include the National Guidelines for Special Education in Basic Education (Diretrizes Nacionais 
para Educação Especial na Educação Básica) and the National Special Education Policy from the 
Perspective of Inclusive Education (Política Nacional de Educação Especial da Perspectiva da Educação 
Inclusiva). The latter policy guarantees the right of students with any disability to attend public schools, 
while the former aims to put that democratization into practice, ensuring accessibility and inclusion to 
all (ALVES, 2017). 
Although the legislation has advanced throughout the years, nationally and internationally, 
attitudes of segregation are unfortunately still present in our society, due to poor accessibility, 
stereotypical thoughts, lack of educational and professional opportunities and inadequacy of legislation, 
for example (GARCÍA, 2014). Inclusive perspectives and efforts are necessary to help ensure there are 
more tolerant and egalitarian communities, with equal opportunities to all citizens. 
 
Visual Impairment and Blindness 
 
According to the classification provided by Santos et al (2018), based on data from the World 
Health Organization (WHO) published in 2010, there are at least four levels within the visual spectrum. 
They are divided into: 1) no visual impairment, 2) moderate visual impairment, 3) severe visual 
impairment, and 4) blindness, and are available in Table 1. 
 
TABLE 1 - Visual Impairment: Classification by WHO 
 
 
 
Source: Santos et al (2018). 
 
Based on this classification, we consider: 1) a person with “no visual impairment” as 
someone with mild vision loss or near-normal vision, that is, perceiving light; 2) “moderate visual 
 
6The National Center of Special Education (CENESP) was created in 1973, with the purpose of managing special education 
in the country, establishing that every student with special needs should receive accessibility to develop their abilities. Available 
at: <https://www.diariodasleis.com.br/legislacao/federal/61174-cria-o-centro-nacional-de-educauuo-especial-cenesp-e-da-
outras-providencias.html>. Access on: Jul. 17, 2022. 
7We opted for translating the original quotes from Portuguese to English, in order to keep the flow of the reading in English. 
The responsibility of the translations relies on the present work’s authors. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4455
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
impairment” as moderate low vision, still perceiving light; 3) “severe visual impairment” as grave low 
vision, but perceiving a little of light; and 4) “blindness” as profound to total visual impairment, 
perceiving no or almost no light. Thus, it is possible to say that blindness is one type of visual impairment, 
which is the most severe one. 
According to WHO, in 2019, there were nearly 39 million blind people around the world, of 
which over 1,5 million are from Brazil (CEGUEIRA AFETA 39 MILHÕES DE PESSOAS NO 
MUNDO, 2019), based on the last census by the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE). 
Furthermore, as reported by an IBGE survey published in 2015 (VILLELA, 2015), the South region of 
Brazil has the biggest proportion of people with some level of visual impairment, representing 5.4% of 
its population.  
Although the majority of people with visual impairment or blindness are over the age of 50 
(BLINDNESS AND VISION IMPAIRMENT, 2021), we cannot disregard the younger masses who 
live in the same conditions and do not receive assistance, especially when it comes to blind children 
attending school. Based on these data, we decided that the target audience for the didactic adaptation 
proposal would be students with blindness, which is the last stage of visual impairment. By addressing 
these audience, such an adaptation may be used for students of all visual levels. 
 
Perspectives for teaching blind students  
 
By analyzing recent didactic materials and textbooks, it is possible to observe that most of 
them present a lot of visual elements and multimodal texts, such as images, drawings, maps and posters. 
Although those elements are important in the education, language teaching materials do not need to be 
solely visual (TEACHING LANGUAGES TO BLIND AND VISUALLY IMPAIRED STUDENTS, 
2022), as there are other options of teaching methods that encompass non-sighted students as well.  
Undoubtedly, there are certain challenges EAL teachers may find when having blind 
students in class: students may be unmotivated or discouraged, both the student or the teacher may be 
unfamiliar with Braille and other accessible materials, the blind students may not feel included by their 
own classmates, among others (BENWELL, 2022)8. Therefore, it is important for teachers to be patient 
and try to create a comfortable environment, in which students are not afraid of speaking out and making 
mistakes. As teachers, we need to keep in mind that a blind student is first and foremost a student and 
their condition comes secondly, that is, blind students need to receive equal treatment as their sighted 
classmates, even though their learning methods may be different. 
As challenging as teaching an additional language to a blind student may be, it is also a 
rewarding experience, as both student and teacher will learn through the joint construction of different 
knowledge. In this two-way path, students may feel more confident and succeed, one day at a time, in 
learning a new language, while the EAL teacher will discover different materials and learn a bit each day 
on how to cope with a blind student in class. 
Based on such considerations, our research questions are: How can a blind student learn an 
additional language, without the access to printed didactic activities and adapted materials, in regular 
classrooms? Can visual and printed activities be adapted with everyday materials? What are the teacher’s 
options to make the EAL printed activities reach the blind student? In order to answer those questions, 
we suggest adaptations for didactic activities based on a Review of Literature on the teaching and learning 
process of blind students, which is presented after the Methodology. 
 
METHODOLOGY 
 
The present work is qualitative research, as it “grounded in a philosophical position which 
is broadly ‘interpretivist’ in the sense that it is concerned with how the social world is interpreted, 
 
8Tara Benwell is a member of the website EnglishClub, in which students can practice and learn English, while teachers access 
a variety of didactic materials, which include information on difficulties in the teaching and learning process. Available at: 
<https://www.englishclub.com/learning-difficulties/visual-impairment.htm>. Access on: Jul. 17, 2022. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4455
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understood, experienced, produced or constituted” and “based on methods of data generation which are 
both flexible and sensitive to the social context in which data are produced” (MASON, 2002, p. 3). From 
this perspective, the researcher isn’t and “cannot be neutral, or objective, or detached, from the 
knowledge and evidence they are generating” (MASON, 2002, p. 7). 
Although this research is subscribed to the qualitative approach, it was also necessary to 
adopt procedures from the quantitative approach, which supported the analysis with quantified data 
organized in tables and graphics, for example (SILVA, 2016; SANTADE, 2014). According to Santade 
(2014), while quantitative research organizes numerical information through statistical procedures, 
qualitative research concerns a structured and interpretative analysis of information. Combined, such 
approaches help the “accuracy of the description and analysis of the collected data”, reaching faithful 
authentic results and conclusions (SANTADE, 2014, p. 102). The quantitative approach helped us with 
the collection and quantification of data both in theoretical (collecting articles to the Review of Literature) 
and practical (gathering data of the sixth grade English textbooks used in public schools of Santa Maria, 
RS, in 2021) moments. On the other hand, the qualitative approach was useful to the moment of analysis 
and perceptions of such data, which are the basis for our adaptation proposal. 
At the same time as we are involved in researching social issues in which language is a 
constitutive element, we seek not only to discuss, but also to promote interventions for the problems 
studied (SCHLATTER, 2009), which configures an Applied Linguistics approach. According to Mason 
(2002), “qualitative research should be conducted as a moral practice, and with regard to its political 
context” (p. 8). In the present work, we are foraging solutions for the lack of adapted EAL materials for 
blind students attending the 6th grade. For this reason, this research can also be described as 
propositional, since we offer an adaptation for EAL activities that do not address to blind students’ 
learning needs.  
In the next two sections, we present the Review of Literature regarding adapted materials 
for blind students, as well as the choice of textbook and unit, which supports the adaptation suggestions. 
 
REVIEW OF LITERATURE 
 
This section concerns the exploratory research about previous studies on adaptation of 
didactic materials for blind students. In that research, different Applied Linguistics journal websites were 
consulted, but we could not find any results searching for keywords such as “blind”, “blind students” 
and “blindness” (in English and in Portuguese languages). Such data reinforce the importance of studies 
regarding adaptation of materials for blind students, which help to assist teachers on regular classes to 
include those students in all didactic activities. 
Due to the lack of papers in Applied Linguistics journals, we opted for searching texts on 
the Scientific Electronic Library Online (SciELO) platform. Using the research strategies available, the 
texts resulting in the investigation present in their title the word “blind” and also include the words 
“teaching” and “school” in their title, abstract or keywords. In addition, some research filters were 
applied: a) the journal of publication should be related to education; b) the texts should be open access; 
c) within the genre category (Tipos de Literatura), the texts should be either articles or review articles. 
This search resulted in nine papers.  
Taking into consideration the purpose of the present work, the following criteria of inclusion 
were adopted: a) the text should be a paper published on SciElo; b) it should be related to adaptation or 
didactic materials for blind students; c) it should be available online and for free; d) it should be related 
to blind students in the school context, even though the themes are varied and not specifically associated 
to the languages field. 
Applying these criteria and reviewing the nine resulting papers, five of them remained and 
comprised the Review of Literature and are presented in Chart 1. The other four texts did not attend all 
the inclusion criteria established and were excluded. 
 
CHART 1 – Selected works for the Review of Literature 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4455
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N. 
Title. Author. Year 
Keywords 
Abstract with highlights 
1 
Experimental activities in the 
Early Years of Elementary 
School: Analysis on a backdrop 
with 
blind 
students. 
(BIAGINI; 
GONÇALVES, 
2017). 
Experimentation; 
Blind 
and 
sighted; 
Science teaching. 
The research’s purpose is to investigate 
limits and potentialities of an experimental 
activities methodology for teaching and 
learning in Natural Science in a class of 3rd-
year elementary school attended by seers 
and one blind student. […] 
2 
Oral History: a Method for 
Investigating 
Physics 
Education of Blind Students. 
(FERREIRA; 
DICKMAN, 
2015). 
Special 
Education; 
Physics 
Education; 
Oral History; 
Blind Student. 
In this paper, we discuss the role of oral 
history in qualitative research, as an essential 
tool for collecting data from blind students 
or their teachers, [...]. The analysis of the 
blind students’ narratives provides data 
that indicate the best choices the 
researcher 
should 
make 
when 
elaborating 
strategies 
and 
didactic 
materials appropriate to blind students 
[…]. 
3 
Inclusion of Blind Students in 
Mathematics 
Classes: 
development of a teaching kit. 
(ULIANA, 2013). 
Teaching 
Material 
Kit; 
Blind 
Student; 
Mathematics. 
This article presents the development and 
testing of an educational kit [...]. The kit 
enables blind people, using the sense of 
touch, to carry out various mathematical 
activities involving plane geometric figures 
and graphs of polynomial functions. [...] The 
material was tested by one 6th gradeblind 
student in a public school in the state of 
Rondonia […]. 
4 
The planning of Mechanics and 
Modern 
Physics 
teaching 
activities for blind students: 
difficulties 
and 
alternatives. 
(CAMARGO; NARDI, 2006). 
Education; 
Special 
Education; 
Educational Media. 
We report here partial outcomes of a study 
aimed to verify future High School teachers 
performance when [...] were asked to plan 
Mechanics and Modern Physics topics to a 
students class which included visual 
handicapped pupils. [...] as alternatives, 
future teachers showed creativity in order to 
surpass passive aptitudes related to this 
educational problem and working out 
methodological strategies deprived of 
the relation knowing/seeing. 
5 
Reports by Blind Musicians: 
Supporting the Teaching of 
Music for Students with Visual 
Impairments. 
(OLIVEIRA; 
REILY, 2014). 
Special 
Education; 
Music 
Education; 
Visual 
impairment; 
Inclusion. 
This qualitative study aimed to understand 
significant issues regarding access to 
music learning faced by blind musicians. 
[...] The article intends to reveal music 
learning characteristics and needs of 
students with visual impairments, so as to 
improve music teachers’ professional 
practice within the regular school 
context, as well as to discuss implications 
for teacher certification in university courses 
for future teachers of students with visual 
impairments. 
 
Source: The authors, based on Biagini and Gonçalves (2017), Ferreira and Dickman (2015), Uliana (2013), 
Camargo and Nardi (2006), Oliveira and Reily (2014). 
 
The data from those five papers indicate that they complement each other with teaching 
pedagogies necessary to teach and include a blind student in class. Those pedagogies are related to: 
• Lack of previous research available about the education of blind students in many 
areas, including the English field (OLIVEIRA; REILY, 2014); 
• Unpreparedness of teachers to deal with students’ needs (including blind students), 
due to the lack of related contents in teacher education (FERREIRA; DICKMAN, 
2015; ULIANA, 2013; CAMARGO; NARDI, 2006;  OLIVEIRA; REILY, 2014); 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4455
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• Student’s autonomy/independence (BIAGINI; GONÇALVES, 2017; FERREIRA; 
DICKMAN, 2015; ULIANA, 2013; CAMARGO; NARDI, 2006; OLIVEIRA; 
REILY, 2014); 
• Lack of adapted materials headed for blind students (BIAGINI; GONÇALVES, 
2017; FERREIRA; DICKMAN, 2015; ULIANA, 2013; CAMARGO; NARDI, 
2006;  OLIVEIRA; REILY, 2014); 
• Problems with inclusion of blind students in the regular classroom (FERREIRA; 
DICKMAN, 2015; ULIANA, 2013; CAMARGO; NARDI, 2006; OLIVEIRA; 
REILY, 2014); 
• Ideas for the adaptation proposal (BIAGINI; GONÇALVES, 2017; FERREIRA; 
DICKMAN, 2015; ULIANA, 2013; CAMARGO; NARDI, 2006; OLIVEIRA; 
REILY, 2014). 
 
As mentioned in the previous section, it was difficult to find previous studies about didactic 
materials for Brazilian blind students when generating data for the Review of Literature, so much so 
none of the articles address EAL language materials. However, that lack of research on materials for 
blind students does not seem to be a problem exclusively related to the English language field as other 
research from our review indicated the same difficulty in the Physics (FERREIRA; DICKMAN, 2015) 
and Music (OLIVEIRA; REILY, 2014) fields, for example, and the necessity of deepening on the issue. 
Such data indicate a research gap in many educational fields and the need to learn from our colleagues 
and special educators how to include and adapt materials of all school disciplines for blind students.  
The lack of research in the educational area affects the classroom context, since there is not 
enough widely available guidance for teachers to adapt printed materials for blind students by themselves. 
Other difficulties relate to the lack of preparation in teacher education undergraduate courses 
(FERREIRA; DICKMAN, 2015; CAMARGO; NARDI, 2006; OLIVEIRA; REILY, 2014), in which 
future teachers only get a glimpse on the special education themes. Such a fact is demonstrated in Oliveira 
and Reily’s research (2014). Through semi-structured interviews with five blind music students, the 
authors investigated the learning process of those students, “in order to unveil problems faced by them 
regarding the access to and learning of music” (OLIVEIRA; REILY, 2014, p. 407). One of the results 
indicated a possible lack of disciplines in undergraduate courses addressing the specificities of students 
with disabilities (OLIVEIRA; REILY, 2014, p. 417). Another related example occurs in the context of 
teacher education undergraduate courses of Universidade Federal de Santa Maria (UFSM), including the 
English Major9, in which there is only one course in the curriculum concerning the different spectrums 
of special education. In addition, Ferreira and Dickman (2015, p. 245) cite daily problems faced by in-
service teachers, such as “violence, low pay, indiscipline and institutional assessments”, which may 
interfere in the search for continued education specialized on adaptations for impaired students. 
The scarcity of information and pre and in-service teacher education may result in the 
underdevelopment of the blind student’s autonomy, since the unprepared teacher may not provide them 
with the necessary support and may end up overexplaining the activities or even giving away the answers. 
Biagini and Golçalves (2017) demonstrated the results of a group activity proposal for a third year 
elementary school class formed by sighted and one blind student. The proposal consisted in dividing the 
class into groups of four, in which each student would play a different role (reader, writer, communicator, 
and coordinator) to analyze a text selected by the researchers. As a result of the experiment, the blind 
student demonstrated a lack of independence to conclude activities alone, regularly requiring the help of 
the teacher or colleagues even for simpler exercises: 
 
João was frequently “supported” by his classmates. For example, every day one of them was 
drafted by the teacher to accompany João during school break. However, the classmates’ 
 
9For example, in the English Major at UFSM, the course “Fundamentos da Educação Especial “A” (Principles of Special 
Education “A”) is offered in the second semester of the curriculum. There are no other courses in the obligatory curriculum 
attending 
the 
specificities 
of 
teaching 
impaired 
students, 
such 
as 
blind 
students. 
Available 
at: 
<https://www.ufsm.br/cursos/graduacao/santa-maria/letras/informacoes-do-curriculo>. Access on: Jul. 17, 2022. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4455
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
attitude of solidarity went along with one problem: the lack of opportunity for the development 
of João’s autonomy (BIAGINI; GONÇALVES, 2017, p. 10). 
 
The results by Biagini and Gonçalves (2017) are an example of the blind student’s 
dependence on teacher assistance, which is related to unpreparedness of the teacher and lack of 
information on how to deal with a blind student in class. That situation may also impact on blind 
students’ socialization and introspection, as in João’s case. He only participated in group and oral 
activities responding to the interventions of his colleagues and teachers, even though such activities were 
planned considering his impairment (BIAGINI; GONÇALVES, 2017).  
It is also important to remember not to impose all the responsibility exclusively on in-service 
teachers, who mostly are overcharged and are not given the working conditions and necessary time to 
adapt materials. In the case of many public schools, the deficiency of tactile resources available to be 
used as didactic materials in many disciplines also represents a problem (ULIANA, 2013). Such matter 
was one of the motivations to Uliana’s research (2013), which aimed to construct and experiment a 
pedagogical kit to teach Math for blind students. In semi-structured interviews, both teachers and 
students highlighted the necessity of having adapted materials specifically designed for blind students 
available at school, among other factors reported in Chart 2. 
 
CHART 2 – Summary of factors highlighted by Uliana (2013) 
 
Students 
Teachers 
• 
There is a Resource Room available for 
students. 
• 
There are no books printed in Braille 
available. 
• 
They present an age/grade discrepancy 
of seven years on average. 
• 
They complained about the lack of 
teachers’ qualification to address their 
educational difficulties, especially in 
Math. 
• 
They manifested the necessity of having 
pedagogical materials that enable the 
access to curricular contents in full. 
• 
They consider learning Math difficult. 
• 
Both teach other students with disabilities. 
• 
They complained about the lack of 
professional qualification. 
• 
They mentioned that inclusion in the 
schools they work in is only in theory. 
• 
They highlighted the necessity of having 
pedagogical materials specifically headed 
for blind students. 
• 
They already improvised some pedagogical 
materials to address the demands of their 
students with disabilities. 
• 
Both do not know how to operate the 
Soroban and do not master the reading and 
writing in Braille. 
 
Source: Translated from Uliana (2013, p. 607). 
 
It is important to notice that, even though there was a resource room 10  for special 
educational services, there were no pedagogic materials available for blind students to access all the 
curricular content, leaving many gaps in their learning process. Consequently, the teacher was required 
to design an improvised material, often without financial assistance, to supply the demand for adapted 
material unavailable at school.  
In addition, problems of inclusion of the blind student in class (CAMARGO; NARDI, 2006; 
ULIANA, 2013; OLIVEIRA; REILY, 2014; FERREIRA; DICKMAN, 2015) also require our attention. 
According to Ferreira and Dickman (2015), the inclusion of blind people in all contexts works in theory, 
but it is still a challenge when it meets the classroom setting. In their research, the authors aimed to 
explain how the oral history methodology contributes to the understanding of blind students in the 
learning of Physics. The oral history method consists in giving voice to a forgotten minority, with the 
 
10The Resource Rooms (“Salas de Recursos”, in Portuguese) aim to support the offer of special educational services, as they 
provide complementary or supplementary materials to encompass the necessities of students with disabilities, pervasive 
developmental disorders, high abilities or giftedness in regular schools. Such resources help to guarantee the conditions for 
those 
students 
to 
have 
access, 
to 
participate 
and 
learn 
properly 
in 
regular 
classes. 
Available 
at: 
<http://portal.mec.gov.br/pet/194-secretarias-112877938/secad-educacao-continuada-223369541/17430-programa-
implantacao-de-salas-de-recursos-multifuncionais-novo>. Access on: Jul. 17, 2022. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4455
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
intent to deepen the personal previous experiences of those people and to overcome further difficulties. 
Such a method gives blind students freedom to describe their experience with different materials and 
teaching approaches, so as to advise the teacher of strategies that may or may not succeed for a specific 
student's learning. The oral history method brought good results to Ferreira and Dickman’s research 
(2015), showing itself as one solution for the lack of inclusion of the blind student in class:  
 
[...] with such methodology, the researchers got closer to the narratives of both teachers and 
students in the strategy of reformulating and building materials or didactic resources that enable 
greater inclusion of blind students and, at the same time, it was possible to make methodological 
procedures suitable for curricular contents available to the teacher (FERREIRA; DICKMAN, 
2015, p. 256). 
 
Other methods can also be explored to avoid problems of segregation in class. Camargo and 
Nardi (2006) researched on the lack of inclusion of blind students in Physics classes, aiming to introduce 
that issue to undergraduate teachers and to identify possible solutions to the problem. Their investigation 
was guided from a preparatory and a practical moment, in which future Physics teachers could build a 
course with activities aimed at both 35 sighted and two non-sighted students. Given this circumstance, 
the undergraduate students faced difficulties in finding methods that do not rely on visual resources, 
since many teachers of Physics mostly use the blackboard and visual experiments. Aiming to increase the 
inclusion of blind students in class, and to find solutions for that problem, the undergraduates presented 
Physics activities involving complementary and collaborative roles, such as oral exposition, reading and 
discussion in groups and even plays (CAMARGO; NARDI, 2006).  
Such ideas for teaching methods to include blind students in class are relevant not only for 
the Physics area, but for all educational fields, as they can be adapted and used in other disciplines. In 
the present work’s case, for example, although the articles from the Review may differ from our 
research’s proposal in terms of pedagogical objectives, actions and educational area, they still bring 
valuable contributions to the development of our adaptation of EAL activities for blind students. 
For Biagini and Gonçalves (2017, p. 8), some important aspects to be considered are 
“cooperation, solidarity and respect for differences” between students, which may be achieved through 
group activities. In their research, the authors suggested a reading activity in groups of four, assigning 
each student a role (reader, writer, communicator and coordinator). The activity was organized in three 
moments: 1) individual answers to the teachers’ questions and discussions in the groups to elaborate a 
collective answer; 2) presentation of the answers to the whole class and discussion with new answers; 
and 3) communicate the conclusions and results of each group to the whole class. The researchers chose 
a text from the Natural Sciences area for the discussion, but it is possible to adapt such activity for other 
areas too, including the English language field. In addition, Biagini and Gonçalves (2017) carried out an 
experiment about the importance of water for vegetables, as well as potability and water treatment. In 
this experiment, they identified the importance of the use of multisensory resources (tactile, olfactory, 
auditory observations), which help the blind students to comprehend the explanations. 
Ferreira and Dickman (2015) brought different notions: through interviews with blind 
students, they highlighted the most relevant aspects to be taken into consideration in class. In one of the 
excerpts, the participating student reports the blind student should have the same conditions and the 
necessary adaptations, in order to achieve the same level of understanding as the others. Furthermore, 
the student calls attention to the importance of practical activities and dialogues between teacher and 
student, so that the learning of Physics (or any other discipline) does not seem to be so difficult to the 
point that the student gives up. As a solution, Ferreira and Dickman (2015) propose some ideas of 
adaptations given by the participants (teachers and students): when printed, the description of images 
and graphs is necessary (and recommended); also, the teacher reported the experience with a mockup, 
which may be interpreted by the blind student through the tactile sense.  
Uliana’s research (2013) also brings helpful contributions with the proposal of a pedagogical 
kit. The author mentions some important characteristics to take into consideration when composing 
adapted materials: they must be cheap (such as magnets, metal plates, EVE, paper, glue and polystyrene), 
easy to carry (that is, not too heavy nor too big) and also uncomplicated to assemble and disassemble the 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4455
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pieces in different ways (in order to form various figures and graphical representations). Thus, based on 
other research, Uliana (2013, p. 598) explains that, when they have access to concrete tactile materials, 
“blind students are able to abstract much information [...] at the same level as a sighted student does”. 
In addition, the author reports that it is not necessary to promote drastic changes in the teaching 
methods, but a few adaptations to encompass the blind students’ needs too. 
While Uliana (2013)’s work focuses on tactile resources, Oliveira and Reily (2014) explore 
audible materials through the teaching of music for blind students. Based on Pring and Ockelford (2005), 
Oliveira and Reily (2014) explain that “there is a strong relationship between the development of 
language, cognitive and motor skills of the individual in an environment favorable to musical contact” 
(OLIVEIRA; REILY, 2014, p. 408), which contribute for the education of both sighted and non-sighted 
students. As ideas for didactic materials for blind students, the authors mention playful activities that 
arise the interest of such students in the contents, as well as embossed materials, use of Braille, voice 
synthesizer, screen reader and other technologies that contribute to this student’s learning. Also, Oliveira 
and Reily (2014)  highlight the importance of the incentive coming from the students’ family, teachers 
and community to stimulate their education. 
Finally, Camargo and Nardi (2006) contribute with alternatives for teaching methods 
suggested by undergraduate Physics teachers, in order to include the blind students in class. For the 
adaptation of printed materials, such as written evaluations, the future teachers suggested oral activities 
and recorded audios; for practical experiments, the idea was to make use of everyday materials, which 
explore the tactile and audible senses. It was also suggested group activities that encourage sighted and 
non-sighted students to interact and work together, such as debates, reading and discussion activities (in 
which there is use of orality and students may assume complementary roles) and even theatrical plays. 
Furthermore, the authors and the undergraduate students highlight the importance of active, inclusive, 
dialogic and participative educational approaches, which encourage “students’ attitudes of reflection, 
analysis, decision-making, and teachers’ attitudes of knowledge of their students’ ideas throughout the 
educational process” (CAMARGO; NARDI, 2006, p. 56).  
Such methodological strategies are examples of how to address the teaching of a blind 
student in the classroom. They contribute to avoid future issues of non-inclusion, lack of autonomy or 
teacher unpreparedness, among other obstacles already mentioned that prevent this student from fully 
learning. Even so, it is always important to communicate with the student to verify which learning 
method they prefer and comprehend the contents best (ULIANA, 2013; FERREIRA; DICKMAN, 
2015). Thereby, it is possible for the teacher and the learner to come up with a good method that works 
for both. 
The papers composing this review brought not only ideas for didactic materials, but also 
provided contributions of teaching perspectives and ways to overcome obstacles for the blind students’ 
development. As Uliana (2013, p. 610) explains, “the lack of the sense of sight is not an impassable hurdle 
to the mathematical development of the student”. The same occurs in other fields, including English 
language teaching, since it is possible to achieve the teaching goals of such students with accessible 
materials and inclusive methods. 
The lack of research and teacher preparation on the education of blind students, not only in 
the English language field, may result in adverse consequences for these students’ inclusion and 
independence. For those reasons, the constant search for interventional methods and adapted materials 
that include blind students in the classroom is an increasingly necessary action, so as to cease segregation 
and help in the construction of the student’s autonomy. After presenting the theoretical concepts, we 
present the practical moment, regarding the choice of the textbook and the unit, as well as the adaptation 
proposal for selected didactic activities. 
 
CHOICE OF THE TEXTBOOK AND THE UNIT 
After the theoretical framework, we expose the procedures and results regarding the choice 
of the textbook and the unit, followed by the adaptations suggested for selected didactic activities of 
such unit.  
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4455
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The textbook was chosen from two principles based on Cargnin, Rossi and Ticks (2018, p. 
562): 1) the book should be approved by PNLD in 2021; and 2) it should be the most chosen book in 
the referred year by English language teachers of sixth grade in public schools from Santa Maria, RS. In 
order to discover which textbook is the most used in Santa Maria, the SIMAD’s website11 was accessed, 
and the available form was filled according to the parameters shown in mage 1: 
 
IMAGE 1 - Specifications of the form 
 
 
 
Source: SIMAD. 
 
The parameters chosen were: year 2021, PNLD program, in all types of schools, both urban 
and rural, of municipal administration domain in Santa Maria.  
With those parameters, the website generated 74 results: three CEIs (Child Education 
Centers), 54 EMEFs (Municipal Elementary Schools) and 17 EMEIs (Municipal Nursery Schools). In 
order to discover which English language textbook is the most chosen for the sixth grade, solely the 
EMEF data was computed and analyzed, because the compulsory teaching of English language begins 
only in elementary schools, from the sixth grade on.  
The data generated by the website is summarized in Graph 1, which presents the percentage 
and the number of times that each textbook was mentioned. The percentage of schools classified as “Not 
informed” only encompass the initial years of the elementary level (first to fifth grade) and, therefore, 
did not select an English language textbook. 
 
GRAPH 1 - Times each textbook was mentioned 
 
 
 
Source: The authors. 
 
 
11Sistema de Controle de Materiais Didáticos (SIMAD), acronym for Didactic Material Control System, is the system 
responsible for the registration of didactic and literary materials which integrate the Programs such as the PNLD. Through 
this system, educational institutions register and ask for the books to be used by teachers and students. Available at: 
<https://www.fnde.gov.br/fnde_sistemas/simad>. Access on: Jul. 17, 2022. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4455
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Following the criteria by Cargnin, Rossi and Ticks (2018) and based on the results presented 
on Graph 1, it is possible to conclude that the most selected English language textbook in public schools 
of Santa Maria in 2021 is entitled “Way to English for Brazilian Learners - 6”12, which will be used in the 
majority of public schools in the triennium 2021-2023. 
 
The Textbook 
 
The collection of English language textbooks entitled “Way to English for Brazilian 
Learners”, by Claudio Franco and Kátia Tavares, was first published in 2015. It is divided into four 
different levels (six to nine), which are addressed to sixth, seventh, eighth and ninth grades, respectively.  
On the “Way to English/Way to Go!” website13, the authors provide some complementary 
materials available to English language teachers, such as flashcards, worksheets, tests, educational videos 
and songs, indicating the textbook, the unit and the content with which each of them can be used. 
Although songs and listening activities could be applied in classes with blind students, we could not find 
materials referring specifically to that audience on the website. 
Considering that this paper proposes an adaptation for activities to be used by sixth grade 
blind students, only the first level of this collection is presented, which is the textbook “Way to English 
for Brazilian Learners - 6”. 
 
IMAGE 2 - Cover of the textbook 
 
 
Source: Franco and Tavares (2015). 
 
It is important to highlight that the textbook to be explored in this paper is the student’s 
volume, available at the “Way to English/Way to Go!” website, as we could not access the teacher’s 
version. 
Since the textbook is the first of the “Way to English” collection, it approaches basic aspects 
of the English language, presenting activities in English and in Portuguese, according to their level of 
difficulty - that is, the less complex activities are written in English and the more complex ones in 
Portuguese. The book starts with a brief presentation about how important and ordinary the English 
language is in our daily lives, as well as a description of the purpose of the four volumes of the collection. 
Following the presentation, there is a summary of the eight units of the textbook, in terms of sections 
and contents. The following section, entitled “Tips into Practice”, presents activities of reading and 
learning strategies, which intend to build students’ confidence to complete the exercises throughout the 
 
12Available at: <http://online.anyflip.com/utpc/fotu/mobile/index.html#p=1>. Access on: Jul. 17, 2022. 
13Available at: <http://colecaoway.com.br/>. Access on: Jul. 17, 2022. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4455
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
textbook. Then, there are two pages regarding sentences, in English, to be used in class by students and 
teachers.  
Subsequently, the textbook presents its eight units, which encompass the main contents to 
be learned by sixth grade students through the year. The title, contents and discourse genres worked in 
each of them are exposed in Chart 3, which was constructed based on the information provided in the 
textbook at the beginning of the units. 
 
CHART 3 - Title, contents and discourse genres of the eight units 
 
UNIT 
CONTENTS – LEXICOGRAMMAR 
DISCOURSE GENRES 
1 – Hello 
Greetings - Subject pronouns, verb to be 
(affirmative form) 
Comic strips, motivational posters 
2 - My Life 
Hobbies (personal interests), numbers -  
Possessive adjectives 
Short bios, map, book cover, magazine 
covers 
3 - Around 
the Globe 
Occupations, months of the year, 
countries/nationalities - Verb to be 
(negative and interrogative forms) 
Profiles, magazine cover, headlines, 
comic strip 
4 - Let’s 
Go to 
School! 
Vocabulary related to school, days of the 
week -  Review on verb to be, question 
words 
Timetable (schedule/planner), comic 
strip, campaign posters 
5 - What is 
a Family? 
Vocabulary about family, plurals - Genitive 
case 
Poems, family tree, anagrams, short bio, 
definitions 
6 - Houses 
Around the 
World 
Parts of the house, furniture - There is/ 
there are, prepositions of place 
Description, website, short bio 
7 - Save the 
Animals! 
Animals - Imperative form 
Campaign 
posters, 
word 
search, 
fragment of report, signs, comic strips 
8 -
Exploring 
Different 
Art Forms 
Vocabulary/verbs about forms of art, 
colors - Verb can 
Comic strips, fragment of report 
 
Source: The authors, based on Franco and Tavares (2015). 
 
After every two units, there are sections containing activities of content review, which 
include vocabulary and grammar learned in the two previous units. Following that, the textbook presents 
a section with activities of the main vocabulary learned through the eight units, called “Vocabulary 
Corner”. The next section of the book is entitled “Language Reference in Context”, which presents 
activities about the grammar acquired along the studies using authentic texts, including discourse genres 
such as comic strips, posters and signs. The subsequent pages are dedicated to Glossary, Index and 
Bibliography sections. 
 
The Unit 
 
Although the initial purpose was to select one of the eight main units of the “Way to English 
for Brazilian Learners - 6” book to be presented and adapted in the paper, throughout the analysis of the 
textbook, we found the section “Vocabulary Corner” to be the most significant one to adapt for blind 
students.  
The “Vocabulary Corner” (pages 154 to 165) encompasses 13 activities about the vocabulary 
learned in all the eight units of the textbook, so the adapted material suggested in this paper can be used 
throughout the year and explored in a variety of activities. In addition, it is noticeable that all the activities 
belonging to this section have visual elements, such as pictures and drawings, without any adaptation 
proposals for blind students.  
Image 3 shows two activities concerning units 1 and 2, respectively, which are examples of 
activities presented in the Vocabulary Corner. 
 
IMAGE 3 - Activities from the Vocabulary Corner 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4455
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Franco and Tavares (2015, p. 154-155). 
 
The section starts with activities about the vocabulary content learned on unit 1: Greetings. 
There are some figures describing the greetings and next to them there are blank spaces, in which the 
students must infer and write the correct greeting. Following that, the second activity refers to unit 2, 
which includes vocabulary on Personal Interests. The exercise, as the first one, presents figures of many 
hobbies, and on the blank spaces below them the student must write the proper words. There is also a 
sentence for the students to complete with their favorite free-time activities. Still concerning unit 2, the 
following activity is about Numbers, which requires students to fill in the blanks with the corresponding 
number on its written form.  
Referring to unit 3, there are three activities. The first one suggests a review on vocabulary 
about Occupations, in which images are presented and the student must write the corresponding word. 
The second one concerns the Months of the Year, presenting an incomplete calendar for the students to 
add the correct months. And the third activity, which is about Countries and Nationalities: there are 
images of flags and students are required to identify the country and the nationality they refer to.  
Moving on, the following activities involve the vocabulary learned on unit 4. There is an 
exercise reviewing School Subjects, which asks students to write the corresponding subjects below the 
figures, and another one reviewing the Days of the Week, which requests students to write the seven 
days in order. Following that, there is an activity to complete the family tree with the Members of the 
Family, content learned on unit 5. In the following exercise, reviewing the vocabulary of unit 6, there are 
images of Parts of a House and Furniture, below which students must write the referent words.  
The subsequent activity is about Animals: there are some images with blank spaces for 
students to write the name of the animals, content of unit 7. At last, the two final exercises concern 
vocabulary of unit 8, that is, Colors and Abilities, both of them requiring writing the proper words below 
the images. 
After the analysis and explanation of each activity, it is possible to observe how similar they 
are and how they use a lot of visual elements. Most of the activities have a recurrent feature, which is to 
ask students to write the word that relates to the figure. For this reason, it is important to consider the 
reality of blind students, who probably would be left out of such exercises in class.  
In the next section, we suggest adaptations for some of the didactic activities presented, 
based on the Review of Literature. 
 
ADAPTATION SUGGESTIONS 
Based on previous studies on the issue, the materials presented follow the suggestions 
presented by the authors of the Review of Literature, and are headed to blind sixth grade students, in 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4455
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
order to address the target public and to encourage them to learn an additional language - in this case, 
the English language. 
Although the adaptations suggested are construed based only in the studies of the Review 
of Literature, it is necessary to highlight the importance of the interdisciplinary work with the school 
educational advisor and Special Education professionals. Such a collaboration may give other 
perspectives, beyond the studies presented in this work, and may help to come up with the best method 
to deal with the specificities of each student.  
As explained in the previous section, it was decided to adapt activities of the Vocabulary 
Corner, which concerns the vocabulary learned through the whole textbook. In order to make the 
activities more attractive and accessible to blind students, we opted for the use of ludic approaches, that 
is, to promote interaction of students in a pleasant and meaningful way, which can instigate not only 
blind students, but also sighted students. Therefore, the adaptations presented here are not focused on 
written vocabulary, but the acknowledgement of those words in English language and what they mean 
in those contexts.  
We selected six out of 13 activities of the Vocabulary Corner, which represent examples of 
the many options available to adapt a visual resource to become a didactic activity for both sighted and 
non-sighted students. The activities selected are indicated in Chart 4. 
 
CHART 4 – Activities selected from the Vocabulary Corner 
 
ACTIVITY 
CONTENT 
UNIT 
A 
Occupations 
1 
B 
Months of the Year 
2 
C 
Numbers 
3 
D 
Days of the week 
4 
E 
Animals and Pets 
5 
F 
Greetings 
6 
 
Source: The authors. 
 
It is important to encourage cooperation and interaction between sighted and non-sighted 
students, which could be achieved with group activities (CAMARGO; NARDI, 2006; BIAGINI; 
GONÇALVES, 2017;). For instance, activity A (in Image 4), which concerns Occupations vocabulary, 
could be adapted to a group interactional activity, focused on the speaking and listening skills. 
 
IMAGE 4 – Vocabulary Corner, Activity A 
 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4455
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Franco and Tavares (2015, p. 157). 
 
Instead of working with images and filling in the blanks exercises, the EAL teacher could 
ask students to search on the internet or in books for a career they would like to pursue in the future. 
This research can be made at home, with the assistance of the students’ parents, relatives or friends, to 
be presented for their classmates in class. In a circle, each student explains briefly the career they chose, 
and their classmates can guess which occupation is being described. At the end, the student can confirm 
their answer by completing the sentence “I want to be a…”.   
Another activity that works as an adapted group activity is letter E, concerning the months 
of the year (Image 5). 
 
IMAGE 5 – Vocabulary Corner, Activity B 
 
 
 
Source: Franco and Tavares (2015, p. 158). 
 
One group or pair at a time, students should answer the question “which month…?”, 
requested by the EAL teacher (examples: Which month starts the summer in Brazil? Which month are 
we in now? Which month is Halloween celebrated?). The teacher can ask students to take turns among 
the members of the groups, so as to achieve everyone’s participation, as well as to interact within the 
groups to provide an appropriate answer. Like the first proposal, this adaptation would work with 
listening and speaking skills, functioning as a playful and ludic activity with the purpose to encourage 
participation and inclusion. 
Besides group exercises, the EAL teacher can also work with tactile resources to design 
inclusive didactic activities. As Uliana (2013) demonstrates through the production of a pedagogical kit, 
such concrete materials are very important in the learning process of blind students, since through them 
those students are able to learn at the same level as sighted students. Numbers (Image 6) are also an 
interesting topic to be explored. 
 
IMAGE 6 – Vocabulary Corner, Activity C 
 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4455
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Franco and Tavares (2015, p. 156). 
 
The numbers could be put into cards in high relief, such as relief glue, popsicle sticks or bead 
pieces. If the student is familiar with such resources, the numerals and the numbers in full could be 
presented in Braille as well. In Image 7, there are examples of those cards, in Braille, which were designed 
in a Special Education course. 
 
IMAGE 7 – Example of Braille Cards 
 
 
 
Source: The authors. 
 
The cards can be used by blind students as a support material or even as a game, in which 
the teacher shuffles the cards and the student arranges them to match the word and the numeral. 
Therefore, besides working with speaking and listening, the teacher can reinforce the written form of 
those words as well. 
The same resources can also be used to adapt activity D, concerning the days of the week 
(Image 8). 
 
IMAGE 8 – Vocabulary Corner, Activity D 
 
 
 
Source: Franco and Tavares (2015, p. 161). 
 
It is possible to create a high-relief calendar using velcro, EVE, cardboard and glue, which 
the blind student is able to assemble and disassemble each day. Such activity can also be arranged together 
with activity C and/or activity B, to design a more complete calendar. In this way, there would be three 
packs of EVE cards (one with seven cards for the days of the week, one with the 31 numbers constituting 
the months and another one with the 12 months), and also a piece of cardboard in which the day of the 
week, month and numeral would be glued with velcro. As the former proposal, the words and numbers 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4455
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can be written in the Braille system or, like in the model below (created digitally), in the 
alphabetic/numeric system in high-relief (Image 9). 
 
IMAGE 9 – Calendar model 
 
 
 
Source: The authors. 
 
Besides acting as concrete examples of activities for blind students to explore and learn a 
new language, they also follow the characteristics recommended by Uliana (2013) when proposing a 
tactile adaptation: the materials must be cheap, easy to carry and with pieces that are uncomplicated to 
assemble and disassemble.  
Other than group and tactile activities, the EAL teacher might opt for working with sounds 
or songs. Such an approach draws attention to the use of orality in class, that is, the practical uses of oral 
genres in different contexts. In Camargo and Nardi’s research (2006), future teachers also made use of 
orality by suggesting, for example, oral presentations and theatrical plays in class, in order to overcome 
impasses that might arise from teaching Physics to blind students.  
Examples of didactic activities of the Vocabulary Corner that could be adapted to work with 
sounds and orality are activities E and F (Images 10 and 11). 
 
IMAGE 10 – Vocabulary Corner, Activity E 
 
 
 
Source: Franco and Tavares (2015, p. 163). 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4455
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For activity E, it is possible for the EAL teacher to present the sounds those animals make, 
by using a digital audio from YouTube, for example, and ask students to identify the animal (in English 
language). This activity can be done in groups, pairs or even with the whole class, developing listening 
and speaking skills. 
 
IMAGE 11 – Vocabulary Corner, Activity F 
 
 
 
Source: Franco and Tavares (2015, p. 154). 
 
For activity F, teachers can use a song about the different forms of greetings. There are many 
options available on the internet, so the teacher can choose which one(s) they want to play for the class. 
Yet, searching for options we suggest the video entitled “Hello Song for Kids - Greeting Song for Kids 
- The Singing Walrus”14, available at The Singing Walrus channel on YouTube, because it is more 
interactive and is related to students’ routines.  
In order to internalize the Greetings content, it is possible to ask students to communicate 
with each other using the vocabulary learned in the song. To do so, the teacher can present a certain 
situation (for example, as written in the textbook, saying hello, saying goodbye and asking people how 
they are) and let students interact with one another. In this way, such activity would not only reinforce 
inclusion and interaction between the blind student and their classmates, but also work as a playful 
contextualized activity, which would make students aware of the new language as a social practice, not 
only as a system of rules. 
Those adaptation suggestions are only a few examples for approaches to teach a blind 
student, but there are many other adapted didactic materials that may be valuable to research and 
implement in their education. For instance, texts in Braille (OLIVEIRA; REILY, 2014), recorded audios 
(CAMARGO; NARDI, 2006), debates (CAMARGO; NARDI, 2006) and description of images and 
graphs (FERREIRA; DICKMAN, 2015) may also be helpful and stimulating activities when teaching 
blind students.  
The important aspect is to remember to communicate with students, in order to understand 
their learning necessities and realize which approach will work best for them. In addition, the adapted 
activities presented here can be used for teachers not only from the English language field, but for other 
 
14
Available 
at: 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gghDRJVxFxU&ab_channel=TheSingingWalrus-
EnglishSongsForKids>. Access on: Jul. 17, 2022. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4455
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
courses as well, as a way to create a safe and inclusive environment in all classes, where every student can 
feel comfortable and instigated in learning. 
 
CONCLUSIONS 
The studies and considerations of the present work led us to reflect about the English 
teaching of blind students and the importance of researching and learning about the theme. The 
challenges are evident, but so are the rewards gained from the experience of teaching blind students, as 
there is a joint construction of knowledge among teachers and learners.  
It is known that the government should provide what is needed for public education, but 
there might be schools in which the didactic material necessary for blind students’ education is not 
available. The responsibility then is delegated to the teacher, who might need to think of an adaptation 
for the material initially designed, especially when such material is a textbook or printed activities. 
Therefore, it is necessary for us, language teachers, to learn at least some basic forms of adaptation, as 
well as to communicate with blind students, in order to work with the best method according to their 
necessities and difficulties. 
Some of the options for teachers to adapt didactic activities are the use of tactile resources, 
sounds and songs, games or group activities, which give emphasis on other senses than vision. As a result 
of those changes, blind students would not only feel more confident and free to participate in classes – 
characteristics that are very important when learning an additional language –, but also feel included by 
their teachers and classmates. 
Even though it was based on previous studies on the issue, this research opens doors to 
future opportunities and refinement in the adapted activities (ULIANA; 2013), such as: 
• consulting with schools’ educational advisor and Special Education professionals 
about the effectiveness and implementation of such materials in regular classes; 
• testing and improving the adapted material according to blind students’ necessities 
and abilities; 
• promoting the use of the adaptation in school, in order to include blind students in 
regular classes, even when the textbook is used; 
• analyzing advantages and disadvantages of the material for sighted students, as well 
as students with other disabilities, such as Down syndrome and children with motor 
difficulties; and 
• continuing to design adaptations for other activities, textbooks and grades, headed 
to impaired students who need an adapted material for learning properly.  
 
Hopefully, this work will serve as a sample of the possibilities of adaptations for blind 
learners and will help other teachers, not only of the English language field, to develop lesson plans and 
didactic materials headed to accessibility and inclusion of every student, regardless of any impairment. 
 
REFERENCES 
ALVES, Gabriela L. Desafios de ensinar inglês para pessoas com deficiência visual no Instituto dos Cegos da Paraíba: 
analisando os materiais didáticos. Monografia (Graduação em Letras /Inglês). João Pessoa: Universidade 
Federal da Paraíba, 2017. 
 
BENWELL, Tara. Teaching English to Visually Impaired Learners. EnglishClub. England, 2022.  
Available at: <https://www.englishclub.com/learning-difficulties/visual-impairment.htm>. Access on: 
Jul. 17, 2022.  
 
BIAGINI, Beatriz; GONÇALVES, Fábio P. Atividades experimentais nos anos iniciais do Ensino 
Fundamental: análise em um contexto com estudante cego. Ensaio Pesquisa em Educação em Ciências. v. 19, 
e2703, p. 1-22, 2017. <https://doi.org/10.1590/1983-21172017190130> 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4455
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BLINDNESS AND VISION IMPAIRMENT. World Health Organization. 2021. Available at: 
<https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/blindness-and-visual-impairment>. Access on: 
Jul. 17, 2022. 
 
CAMARGO, Eder P. de; NARDI, Roberto. Planejamento de atividades de ensino de mecânica e física 
moderna para alunos com deficiência visual: dificuldades e alternativas. REIEC Revista Electrónica de 
Investigación en Educación en Ciencias, v. 1, n. 2, p. 39-64, 2006.  
Available at: <http://www.scielo.org.ar/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&pid=S1850-
66662006000200003>. Access on: Jul. 17, 2022. 
 
CARGNIN, Elisane S.; ROSSI, Angela M.; TICKS, Luciane K. Concepções de aprendizagem 
subjacentes às atividades do livro didático Português: Projeto Teláris. Domínios de Lingu@gem. v. 12, n. 1, 
p. 551-580,  2018. <https://doi.org/10.14393/DL33-v12n1a2018-19> 
 
CEGUEIRA AFETA 39 MILHÕES DE PESSOAS NO MUNDO; CONHEÇA SUAS PRINCIPAIS 
CAUSAS. 
G1. 
2019. 
Available 
at: 
<https://g1.globo.com/ciencia-e-
saude/noticia/2019/06/16/cegueira-afeta-39-milhoes-de-pessoas-no-mundo-conheca-suas-principais-
causas.ghtml>. Access on: Jul. 17, 2022.   
 
FERREIRA, Amauri C.; DICKMAN, Adriana G. História oral: um método para investigar o ensino de 
física para estudantes cegos. Revista Brasileira de Educação Especial, v. 21, n. 2, p. 245-258, 2015. 
<https://doi.org/10.1590/S1413-65382115000200006> 
 
FIGUEIREDO, Rosana M. É. de; KATO, Olivia M. Estudos nacionais sobre o ensino para cegos: uma 
revisão bibliográfica. Revista Brasileira de Educação Especial, v. 21, n. 4, p. 477-488, 2015. 
<https://doi.org/10.1590/S1413-65382115000400011> 
 
FRANCO, Claudio; TAVARES, Kátia. Way to English for Brazilian learners. São Paulo: Ática, 2015. 
 
GARCÍA, Vinícius G. Panorama da inclusão das pessoas com deficiência no mercado de trabalho no 
Brasil. Trabalho, Educação e Saúde, v. 12, n. 1, p. 165-187, 2014. <https://doi.org/10.1590/S1981-
77462014000100010> 
 
HUGHEY, Judy K. Strategies to Enhance Interpersonal Relations in Academic Advising. NACADA 
Journal, v. 31, n. 2, p. 22-32, 2011. <https://doi.org/10.12930/0271-9517-31.2.22> 
 
MASON, Jennifer. Qualitative Researching. London, Thousand Oaks; New Delhi: SAGE Publications, 
2002. 
 
MOTTA-ROTH, Desirée; HEBERLE, Viviane M. A short cartography of genre studies in Brazil. Journal 
of English for Academic Purposes, v. 19, p. 22-31, 2015. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2015.05.006>. 
 
OLIVEIRA, Leonardo A. C.; REILY, Lucia H. Relatos de músicos cegos: subsídio para o ensino de 
música para alunos com deficiência visual. Revista Brasileira de Educação Especial, v. 20, n. 3, p. 405-420, 
2014. <https://doi.org/10.1590/S1413-65382014000300007> 
 
PRING, Linda; OCKELFORD, Adam. Children with septo-optic dysplasia - musical interests, abilities 
and provision: the results of a parental survey. British Journal of Visual Impairment, v. 23, n. 2, p. 58-66, 
2005. <https://doi.org/10.1177/0264619605054777> 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4455
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RESOURCES FOR TEACHING ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE TO LEARNERS WITH 
BLINDNESS OR VISUAL IMPAIRMENT, Paths to Literacy, Watertown, 2022.  
Available at: <https://www.pathstoliteracy.org/resource/resources-teaching-english-second-language-
learners-blindness-or-visual-impairment/>. Access on: Jul. 17, 2022. 
 
SANTADE, Maria S. B. A metodologia de pesquisa: instrumentais e modos de abordagem. In: SIMÕES, 
Darcília; GARCÍA, Flávio (Orgs.). A Pesquisa Científica como Linguagem e Práxis. Rio de Janeiro: Dialogarts, 
2014, p. 95-109. 
 
SANTOS, Agda C. de S.; BAKKE, Hanne A.; OLIVEIRA, Ilana S. de; SARINHO, Silvia W. The 
performance of children and adolescents with low vision on the Pediatric Balance Scale. Motricidade, v. 
14, n. 2-3, p. 71-78, 2018. <https://doi.org/10.6063/motricidade.13753> 
 
SCHLATTER, Margarete. O ensino de leitura em língua estrangeira na escola: uma proposta de 
letramento. Calidoscópio, v. 7, n. 1, p. 11-23, 2009. <https://doi.org/10.4013/cld.2009.71.02> 
 
SILVA, Jefferson E. do N. Modos de fazer da pesquisa acadêmica: descrição de uma experiência em 
análise de materiais didáticos de língua italiana. Cadernos Neolatinos, v. 1, n. 2, p. 60-70, 2016.  
Available at: <https://revistas.ufrj.br/index.php/cn/article/view/9729>. Access on: Jul. 17, 2022. 
 
TEACHING LANGUAGES TO BLIND AND VISUALLY IMPAIRED STUDENTS. MIUSA. 
Eugene, 2022. Available at: <https://www.miusa.org/resource/tipsheet/teachingvi>. Access on: Jul. 17, 
2022. 
 
ULIANA, Marcia R. Inclusão de Estudantes Cegos nas Aulas de Matemática: a construção de um kit 
pedagógico. Bolema: Boletim de Educação Matemática, v. 27, n. 46, p. 597-612, 2013. 
<https://doi.org/10.1590/S0103-636X2013000300017> 
 
UNESCO. World Declaration on Education for All: Meeting Basic Learning Needs. In: WORLD 
CONFERENCE ON EDUCATION FOR ALL – MEETING BASIC LEARNING NEEDS. Jomtien, 
Thailand, 1990. Available at: <https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000086291>. Access on: Jul. 
17, 2022. 
 
VILLELA, Flávia. IBGE: 6,2% da população têm algum tipo de deficiência. Agência Brasil. Rio de Janeiro, 
2015. Available at: <https://agenciabrasil.ebc.com.br/geral/noticia/2015-08/ibge-62-da-populacao-
tem-algum-tipo-de-deficiencia>. Access on: Jul. 17, 2022. 
 
DECLARATION OF AUTHORS' CONTRIBUTION 
 
Fernanda Luisa Brixius: contributed  substantially  to  the construction  of  the  entire  work,  
methodological development, data analysis, writing and final review. 
 
Helena Vitalina Selbach: contributed  substantially  to  the  construction  of  the  entire  work,  
methodological development, data analysis, writing and final review. 
 
Patrícia Marcuzzo: contributed  substantially  to  the  construction  of  the  entire  work,  methodological 
development, data analysis, writing and final review. 
 
 
DECLARATION OF NO CONFLICT OF INTEREST 
 
The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest with this article. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4455
This preprint was submitted under the following conditions: 
The authors declare that they are aware that they are solely responsible for the content of the preprint and
that the deposit in SciELO Preprints does not mean any commitment on the part of SciELO, except its
preservation and dissemination.
The authors declare that the necessary Terms of Free and Informed Consent of participants or patients in
the research were obtained and are described in the manuscript, when applicable.
The authors declare that the preparation of the manuscript followed the ethical norms of scientific
communication.
The authors declare that the data, applications, and other content underlying the manuscript are
referenced.
The deposited manuscript is in PDF format.
The authors declare that the research that originated the manuscript followed good ethical practices and
that the necessary approvals from research ethics committees, when applicable, are described in the
manuscript.
The authors declare that once a manuscript is posted on the SciELO Preprints server, it can only be taken
down on request to the SciELO Preprints server Editorial Secretariat, who will post a retraction notice in its
place.
The authors agree that the approved manuscript will be made available under a Creative Commons CC-BY
license.
The submitting author declares that the contributions of all authors and conflict of interest statement are
included explicitly and in specific sections of the manuscript.
The authors declare that the manuscript was not deposited and/or previously made available on another
preprint server or published by a journal.
If the manuscript is being reviewed or being prepared for publishing but not yet published by a journal, the
authors declare that they have received authorization from the journal to make this deposit.
The submitting author declares that all authors of the manuscript agree with the submission to SciELO
Preprints.
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
