This study aimed to assess the subjective knowledge (SK) of adolescents about 
the health effects of smoking and association with smoking status. A cross-sectional 
school survey was carried out in Goiás, Midwestern Brazil. Participants were 3034 
students aged 13-19. SK was assessed by three questions about ‘How do you evaluate 
your knowledge on:’ (1) ‘Effects of smoking on the general health of people who smoke’, 
(2) ‘Effects of smoking on the oral health of people who smoke’, (3) ‘Effects of other 
people smoking on the health of people who do not smoke (passive smokers)’. Smoking 
status categories were never-smoker, former smoker, and smoker. Poisson regression 
was used in the statistical analysis. Prevalence ratios and 95% confidence intervals (CI) 
are reported. About half of the participants had low SK about general health effects of 
smoking, and most had low SK about oral health (62.9%) and second-hand effects 
(61.5%). Compared with smokers and former smokers, never-smokers were more likely 
to have low SK about general (1.52; 95%CI=1.25-1.85), oral (1.17; 95%CI=1.03-1.32) 
and second-hand effects (1.21; 95%CI=1.16-1.38) of smoking. Adolescents’ SK about the 
health effects of smoking tended to be low, especially among never smokers. 

Smoking and exposure to tobacco smoke negatively impact health with the development 
of several chronic non-communicable diseases, diseases of the respiratory system and 
contagious diseases1. In the oral cavity, smoking also causes a devastating effect, causing 
neoplasms and contributing to the etiology of periodontal diseases2. 

Among the various forms of presentation of tobacco products, smoked combustible 
cigarettes remain the most used worldwide3. Given that most adult smokers started 
smoking during adolescence4, the adolescent population is one of the most important 
target groups for preventing smoking initiation1,3. Among the adolescent smokers, it is 
essential to promote smoking cessation interventions1. 

Many adolescents may not be aware that smoking is harmful for their health4-9, especially 
regarding second-hand smoking10-13 and oral health effects14. A lack of knowledge about 
the hazards of smoking has been described as a predictor of smoking status13,15-18 and 
susceptibility to smoking19-21 in this population group. Adolescents from Aboriginal and 
Black groups may be less likely than White adolescents to link smoking to health 
effects22. Also, male students have been found to have less knowledge of the health 
hazards of smoking than their female counterparts23. 

Previous studies on adolescents' knowledge about smoking effects on health have focused 
on their objective knowledge measured by an objective test, instead of their subjective 
knowledge (SK). SK refers to the knowledge that individuals perceive to have24-26. The 
measurement of SK about a product among its users or potential users is important 
because it can indicate not only their knowledge levels, but also their level of self-
confidence about what they know24-26. 

Furthermore, the extant literature typically analyzed knowledge about smoking effects on 
health as a predictor of adolescent smoking. As the main global strategy to warn people 
about the harmful effects of cigarettes has been to warn smokers through the packaging 
of tobacco products1, it can be suggested that smoking status has assumed the role of 
predictor of this knowledge among adolescents. 

As consumers or potential consumers of both tobacco products and antitobacco messages, 
how do the adolescents evaluate their level of knowledge about the health effects of 
smoking? In this study, the aim was to assess the SK of adolescents about the health 
effects of smoking and association with smoking status. 

We carried out a cross-sectional school survey. Participants were adolescent students 
from the Federal Institute of Education Science and Technology of Goiás (IFG). This is 
a public educational institution that has high schools in 13 municipalities of Goiás, in the 
Midwest region of Brazil, including one of the Brazilian capital cities. All the IFG schools 
(n=14) took part in the survey.  

The sample size was calculated using the online OpenEpi tool and the following 
parameters for calculating proportions: (1) estimated population of IFG high school 
students in 2018, aged up to 19 years old (n=3694); (2) 5.9% expected frequency of 
current cigarette use (in the last 30 days) and 19.4% of cigarette experimentation, based 
on prevalence among Brazilian public school students aged 16 to 17 found by the National 
School Student Health Survey in 2015; (3) 2% sample error; and (4) 95% confidence 
interval. The minimum number estimated for the sample was 467 students for the ‘current 
smoker’ outcome and 1068 for the ‘tobacco use experimentation’ outcome. To ensure the 
sample size, all the IFG high-school students aged between 13 and 19 years old who were 
attending classes when the data were collected were invited to participate in the survey 
(n=3043). 

The survey protocol was approved by the Research Ethics Committee (REC) of the 
sponsor institution, the Federal University of Goiás, Brazil (Approval #2142027). The 
REC exempted the survey from obtaining formal permissions from parents or guardians 
of underage adolescents (Approval #2431088). Subsequently, the protocol was approved 
by the REC of the institution where data were collected (Approval #2556510). Formal 
authorizations were given by school administrators, and all the participants signed 
informed consent forms. 

Data were collected in a self-administered printed questionnaire, including validated 
scales and a set of questions specifically designed for this survey. The new questions were 
based on a literature review and later assessed by a group of six PhD researchers with 
experience in studies based on health questionnaires. The instrument was also pre-tested 
in a sample of 14 adolescents who were not part of the study’s target population27. 

The outcome variables were low SK in relation to general and oral health, and second-
hand effects of smoking. The choice for these three variables was based on the health 
content in cigarette pack warnings in Brazil. Questions were: 

‘How do you evaluate your knowledge about’ 

(1) ‘Effects of smoking on the general health of people who smoke’ 

(2) ‘Effects of smoking on the oral health of people who smoke’ 

(3) ‘Effects of other people smoking on the health of people who do not smoke (passive 
smokers)’ 

The answer categories for each question were: ‘no knowledge’, ‘little knowledge’, 
‘average knowledge’, ‘good knowledge’, or ‘excellent knowledge’. Based on the 
responses, the sample was divided into low SK (no + little + average knowledge) and 
high SK (good + excellent). 

The main independent variable was the adolescents’ smoking status, which was obtained 
in two yes/no questions: (1) ‘Have you ever tried smoking cigarettes, even one or two 
puffs?’, (2) ‘Currently, do you smoke cigarettes? (Select yes if you smoked at least one 
cigarette in the past 30 days)’. Those who answered ‘no’ to both questions were classified 
as never-smokers; those who answered ‘yes’ to the first and ‘no’ to the second question 
were former smokers; and those with two positive answers were smokers. 

Covariates were social exposure to smoking and sociodemographic characteristics of the 
adolescents. Social exposure to smoking (No / Yes) was based on the information 
provided by the adolescents on the smoking status of their parents, friends, and romantic 
partners. If any of those were smokers, adolescents were classified as being socially 
exposed to smoking. Sociodemographic variables were: Age: 13 – 19 years; Gender: 
Male / Female; Race/skin color according to official categories in Brazil: White / Black / 
Brown / Yellow / Indigenous; Educational level of the adolescents’ mothers, with seven 
categories ranging from no education to higher education. 

In the statistical analysis, the IBM SPSS Statistics Software (v24) was used. We describe 
our data using counts (n) and proportions (%). Poisson regression with robust variance 
was used to estimate the raw and adjusted associations between the smoking status and 
SK. Prevalence ratios (PR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) are reported. 

The inclusion of covariates in the multivariable models was not based on statistical 
significance, but on the extant knowledge about the determinants of smoking among 
adolescents. Therefore, all the study covariates were included. To avoid reporting 
fallacious findings, estimates for associations between SK and the covariates were not 
reported. 

A total of 3034 adolescents participated in the study (response rate = 99.7%). They were 
mostly female (53.6%), Brown (50.9%), and their mean age was 16 years (SD=1.1). The 
educational level of their mothers was mainly high school (32.4%) or higher education 
(29.4%). The majority had never experimented cigarettes (72.7%) and were socially 
exposed to smoking (65.6%) (Table 1). 

The prevalence of low SK was 47.8% regarding effects of smoking on general health, and 
above 60% regarding both oral and second-hand effects (Table 1). The higher prevalence 
of low SK about each of these three effects occurred among never-smokers (Figure 1). 

In both the unadjusted and adjusted Poisson regression analyses, low SK was statistically 
associated with the adolescents’ smoking status (Table 2). In comparison with smokers, 
never-smokers were 52% more likely to have low SK about smoking effects on general 
health, 17% more likely to have low SK about oral effects, and 21% more likely to have 
low SK about second-hand effects. Furthermore, former smokers were 41% more likely 
to have low SK about general health effects, and 16% more likely to have low SK on the 
second-hand effects of smoking, compared to smokers. 

In this study, adolescent students reported their levels of SK about the effects of smoking 
on general and oral health, and second-hand smoking effect. High rates of low SK were 
observed, especially about the effects on oral health and the second-hand effects, 
indicating possibilities for improvements. These findings agree with several previous 
studies that observed low levels of OK on the harms of smoking among adolescents5-14. 

When we compared the adolescents’ SK according to their smoking status, controlling 
for social exposure to smoking and sociodemographic characteristics, higher rates of low 
SK were reported by never-smokers in comparison with smokers and former smokers. 
This finding may be reflecting the current global situation when it comes to warning 
people about the dangers of smoking. While the coverage of mandatory health warnings 
in packs of tobacco products increased substantially worldwide during the past decade, a 
decrease in mass media campaigns was observed1. 

Noticing health warning labels on cigarette packages has been associated with increased 
cognition about the harms of smoking28-33. Health warnings in tobacco products are one 
of the most powerful anti-smoking interventions of the W axis of the Monitor, Prevent, 
Offer, Warn, Enforce and Raise (MPOWER) initiative operated by the World Health 
Organization to help countries controlling the smoking epidemics worldwide1. However, 
because it mainly reaches people when they are exposed to tobacco products, it should be 
considered a high-risk strategy of anti-smoking education. 

Anti-tobacco mass media campaigns are also effective anti-smoking interventions to 
reduce tobacco use1,31, and cost-effective to fully educate large populations about the risks 
of tobacco use and exposure to second-hand smoke1. Because the goal is to inform the 
whole population about the dangers of smoking, they should be recognized as population-
based strategy of anti-smoking education. 

Considering that knowledge about the health effects of smoking may reduce tobacco 
use34,35, our findings suggest that the awareness of non-smokers should be specially 
targeted for the achievement of the fourth MPOWER global measure to promote smoking 
control: to warn people about the dangers of tobacco1. 

An analogy can be drawn between improving smokers’ knowledge about the harms of 
smoking and improving pregnant adolescents’ knowledge about the risks of becoming 
pregnant, which is to say that it is unacceptable to wait for adolescents to become smokers 
and only then provide warnings to them about the health harms of smoking. It may be too 
late, given that their knowledge may be overwhelmed by nicotine dependence36. 

By itself, knowledge and its rational assessment may not drive the smoking behaviour37. 
Still, it is an essential domain related to the psychological capability of individuals to 
change their smoking behaviour, along with motivation and the opportunity to change35. 

The ‘smoking kills’ warning should be delivered properly to each adolescent, in addition 
to reaching those who are exposed to tobacco products. Although a high-risk education 
strategy to improve tobacco users’ knowledge is important, an intensification of 
population education strategies is now crucial to promote equity in the right to 
information about the dangers of tobacco use among adolescents. 

The limitations of this study include its observational design which does not allow causal 
inference. Also, only public schools were included. An analysis among adolescents from 
public and private schools would have guaranteed better representativeness and, 
therefore, generalizability of the findings. 

In summary, adolescents tended to perceive that they had low knowledge about the effects 
of smoking and second-hand smoking on general and oral health. Low SK was associated 
with the smoking status, meaning that, compared to smokers and former smokers, never-
smokers had lower SK about the health effects of smoking. 

This work was funded by the Foundation for Research Support of the State of Goiás, 
Brazil (FAPEG) (Public call Nº 04/2017 – Research Program for the Unified Health 
System [PP-SUS], and Public call Nº 03/2018 – Scholarships for master's and doctoral 
training); and The Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Education Personnel 
(CAPES), Brazil (Financing code 001). 
