Background: Accurate diagnosis and appropriate management of cow’s milk protein allergy (CMPA) are crucial for avoiding unnecessary prescription of infant formulas. Here, we aimed to use the oral food challenge (OFC) for CMPA confirmation and for assessing development of natural tolerance to milk, in children with clinical CMPA diagnosis. We also assessed the economic impact in public health-care costs of reducing the prescription of infant formulas (provided by the São Paulo State’s public health service, in Brazil, until two years of age) after ruling out CMPA diagnosis in children with negative OFC results.
Methods: We reviewed medical records of 76 children [41 males, median age = 2.0 years (0.8-5.0)] who underwent OFC from January 2016 to June 2018, 30 of whom were ≤2 years old. Results: Before OFC, 52 (68.4%), 20 (26.3%) and five (5.3%) children were diagnosed with non-IgE-mediated, IgE-mediated and mixed CMPA, respectively. Most children were fed with aminoacid-based formulas (n=29, 38%). OFC was negative in 58 (76%) children, thus ruling out CMPA diagnosis. Out of 18 (24%) OFC-positive children, most (n=10, 56%) had gastrointestinal symptoms. After ruling out CMPA diagnosis, a mean of 152.3 formula cans (2,161.14 US dollars) were saved per children by the public health service. The total amount saved was 64,834.27 US dollars.
Conclusions: OFC proved important not only for ruling out misdiagnosed CMPA, but also for preventing the indiscriminate use of infant formulas, which, in turn, had positive consequences for public health costs.
Cow’s Milk allergy (CMPA) is one of the main food allergies in childhood, with a global prevalence of 2%-3% in the pediatric age group, and 1.8%-7.5% in the first year of life1,2. In Brazil, the incidence and prevalence of CMPA have been estimated at 2.2% and 5.4%, respectively3, and the recent increases in incidence and prevalence make CMPA be considered a public health issue4,5. However, the currently reported prevalence rates are likely to be overestimated, as CMPA diagnosis mostly relies on medical history only.
The variety of clinical manifestations and pathophysiological mechanisms makes it difficult to accurately diagnose CMPA. Regarding clinical and laboratory features, CMPA may be classified as: Non-IgE mediated (with presence of proctocolitis, enteropathy, enterocolitis); IgE-mediated (with presence of urticaria, angioedema, bronchospasm, anaphylaxis); and mediated by mixed mechanisms, that is both IgE- and T cell-mediated (with presence of atopic dermatitis, gastroenteritis and eosinophilic esophagitis)2,6. The gold standard for CMPA diagnosis, regardless of the underlying pathophysiology, is the Oral Food Challenge (OFC) test, which is useful both for confirming the diagnosis and for detecting the development of natural tolerance to milk7. OFC consists in administering progressive doses of the allergen to the patient at regular intervals, and is performed after a period of elimination diet and in a controlled manner6,8,9. Still, OFC is not routinely performed in the CMPA clinical setting in Brazil. Health insurance companies usually do not cover this procedure, which is carried out only in specialized clinics, private hospitals and university research centers.
The Public Health Service of the São Paulo State, in Brazil, provides patients diagnosed with CMPA with infant formulas on a monthly basis until they reach the age of two years10. A medical form stating the clinical diagnosis of CMPA is enough so patients can have access to this benefit, and an OFC result is not routinely required. Thus, a considerable number of children is likely to be misdiagnosed and prescribed restrictive and unnecessary diets, including the indiscriminate use of expensive infant formulas, which, in turn, can negatively impact public health-care costs. These facts clearly demonstrate the importance of the accurate diagnosis and appropriate management of CMPA for public health-care costs. The aim of our study was to assess the usefulness and safety of OFC for confirmation of CMPA diagnosis in children and to assess the economic impact in the a public health service, regarding reduction in the prescription of infant formulas, after exclusion of MA diagnosis in children with negative OFC results.
This was an observational, descriptive study. We reviewed medical records of 76 children aged 0-12 years who were diagnosed with CMPA based on clinical features. All patients were submitted to open OFC with cow’s milk, at the University of Campinas Teaching Hospital (HC Unicamp), a tertiary-care hospital located in the city of Campinas, São Paulo State, Brazil, from January 2016 to June 2018. OFC was used both for confirming CMPA diagnosis and for detecting the development of tolerance to cow’s milk.
OFC was conducted according to our institutional protocol. A period of eight weeks of elimination diet was required before the OFC, either for confirming the CMPA diagnosis or for assessing development of natural tolerance to cow’s milk. Type A pasteurized cow’s milk (for children aged ≥1 year) and a milk formula containing intact milk protein (for children aged <1 year) were administered at increasing doses every 15 minutes, in five stages, with a total amount of 120 mL. During this time, patients were observed by a pediatric immunologist or pediatric gastroenterologist in order to verify objective or subjective adverse reactions to cow's milk, any of which were considered for stopping the OFC, if it was persistent or intense11. Objective signs and symptons of CMPA, such as skin, mucosal, gastrointestinal and respiratory manifestations, and anaphylaxis, were carefully monitored. One week after the OFC, the patients were evaluated for late adverse reactions. In case of any adverse reaction, either immediate or a week after OFC, the test was considered positive for CMPA.
Medical records of patients submitted to OFC were assessed for variables of interest, such as sex, age at the onset of the symptoms, feeding at the onset of the symptoms, clinical manifestations of CMPA, mechanism of allergy, special milk formula used in the elimination diet period, age at which OFC was performed, reason for performing the test, and symptoms in patients with a positive result. The following data were used to assess the economic impact in public health-care costs after excluding CMPA diagnosis due to a negative OFC result: a) price per can of the infant formulas provided by the São Paulo State’s Public Health Service , according to formula’s type (aminoacid- based formula, extensively hydrolyzed formula, or soy-based formula); b) number of infant formula cans available each month for children clinically diagnosed with CMPA, according to their age (in months). For the latter, the following parameters were calculated: amount of money saved (Number of cans saved X price of the formula can); mean amount of money saved per month (total amount saved divided by the number of months without taking the formula); total amount of money saved (sum of the money saved per child). We considered the number of cans saved as the number of cans that would still be provided until the child reached 24 months old, in case they had not undergone OFC. Categorical variables were expressed as frequencies. Numerical variables were expressed as means and standard deviations, in case of normal distribution, or as medians and interquartile ranges, in case of non-normal distribution. Normality was assessed by the Shapiro-Wilk test. Analyses were performed using IBM® SPSS® Statistics software version 24 and Microsoft® Excel 365.
The study was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of the University of Campinas (Unicamp, #2932486, 10/02/2018).
The characteristics of the 76 evaluated patients are described in Table 1. Most patients were male and started to present clinical symptoms before the age of one year. Upon identification of CMPA symptoms, most infants were fed with a standard cow’s milk-based formula containing intact milk protein, while 16 (21.1%) children were exclusively breastfed and 29 (38.2%) patients were fed with whole milk (or derivates) or with both breast milk and infant formulas. Non- IgE mediated CMPA was the most commonly CMPA type diagnosed in the study population. As for prescribed infant formulas, aminoacid-based formulas were most commonly used during the elimination diet period, before OFC was performed. Some patients had the extensively hydrolyzed formula replaced with the aminoacid-based formula due to symptom persistence. Twelve children used more than one type of infant formula during the elimination diet period. OFC results
The median age of the children when OFC was performed was 2.0 years [0.8-5.0]. In most cases, OFC was carried out to evaluate the development of tolerance to cow’s milk. OFC results, along with symptoms presented by patients with positive results are shown in Table 2. Out of the OFC-positive patients, eight (44.4%) had symptoms of IgE-mediated CMPA and were treated with antihistamines, corticosteroids and bronchodilators. Out of these, seven patients had a good response to treatment and one patient had an anaphylactic reaction, requiring treatment with adrenalin. The symptoms of anaphylaxis were rapidly reversed, and this patient was discharged after a 48-hour observation period. Overall, 10 patients had gastrointestinal symptoms during OFC, out of whom eight had late symptoms, as diarrhea or bloody stools, and two had acute Food Protein-Induced Enterocolitis Syndrome (FPIES), including protracted vomiting, requiring hospital admission. These patients progressed well and were discharged within a few days. Most patients had no immediate or late symptoms after OFC, and were considered OFC-negative, thus having the elimination diet suspended.
Among children who tested negative for OFC, 30 had less than 24 months of age, most of whom had clinical diagnosis of non-IgE-mediated CMPA, and aminoacid-based formula was mostly used during their elimination diet period (Table 3). After ruling out CMPA, the mean number of cans saved per children by the public health service was 152.3 cans (40 – 226) (Table 4). The mean amount saved per child was 2,161.14 US dollars (225.82 – 3,509.78) (Table 5). The total amount of money saved in the study population was 64,834.27 US dollars (Table 6).
Although CMPA is very common in childhood, concerns have been risen about overdiagnosis, both in Brazil10 and abroad12,13. Our results give reason for such concerns, since an extense majority of children with clinical diagnosis of CMPA referred to our hospital turned out to be misdiagnosed, as shown by negative OFC results. Such misdiagnoses can have serious consequences not only for patients’ growth and nutrition, but also for public health-care costs. With a low number of patients evaluated, we could show a considerable amount of money saved by a state public health system by avoiding provision of expensive and unnecessarily prescribed infant formulas. Such outcome highlights the importance of a complete diagnostic approach for CMPA and how relying only on clinical criteria can be problematic.
Notably, most children assessed in the present study were clinically diagnosed with non-IgE-mediated CMPA, which is worrisome, as symptoms in this condition are set more slowly and are not specific of CMPA or other food allergies. For this reason, the diagnosis can only be made after elimination diet followed by reintroduction14. Recently, allergy specialists raised concern about the possibility that patients with non-IgE-mediated CMPA can be more vulnerable to unnecessary ingestion of infant formulas, due to these confounders15. A population-based study found that 243 out of 381 children with possible adverse reactions to cow’s milk were misdiagnosed with CMPA, whose symptoms were different when compared to children with IgE-mediated CMPA16. In this scenario, most patients assessed in our study had CMPA ruled out after OFC, and less than a half of patients with a positive OFC result had symptoms of IgE-mediated CMPA. Immunoassays based on detection of serum allergen-specific IgE could be an interesting complement for screening patients with this condition and for guiding a more suitable clinical management. These assays have good sensitivity and specificity2,17–19, are easy to run and several samples can be analyzed simultaneously. However, it should be considered that many tests can present inconclusive results, given the physiological immaturity of the immune system in children. Atopy cases, in which IgE is elevated, may also bias the serological results5. As for children with non-IgE- mediated CMPA, OFC proved particularly crucial, as these children can reinclude cow’s milk more easily, and in tolerable amounts, in their diets. Still, OFC is not commonly performed in public health services in Brazil. Most patients in the present study were referred to HC Unicamp by other public primary or secondary care units. Increasing the access to OFC in secondary care units may help to identify more misdiagnosed children.
There was a substantial reduction in the costs of infant formula provision by the São Paulo State’s public health service after exclusion of 58 (76.3%) misguided CMPA diagnoses (Tables 4-6), which is impressive, given the low number of patients seen in a single center. CMPA overdiagnosis and exaggerated spending on infant formula is a problem also for the English National Health System, which has faced a nearly 500% increase in the prescriptions of these products between 2006 and 2016, while NHS spending on them increased by nearly 700%, from 8.1m to 60m British pounds annualy15. Other study found that in performing OFC was associated with a mean cost estimated at 4184,00 dollars per child, per year of delay in testing20. In our study, aminoacid-based formula was the first therapeutic option in most patients, despite the lack of characterization for its indication. This is the most expensive choice of infant formula and it is not always the best option available for allergic children2,4,5,17,18. Importantly, a recent Cochrane review of 16 studies did not find evidence to support short- or long-term feeding with extensively hydrolyzed formula for preventing CMPA in children, when compared with both maternal breastfeeding and feeding with milk-based formula21. It is worth mentioning that, although there are evidences of mother-child transfer of cow’s milk protein via maternal breastfeeding, the transferred amounts are not likely enough to cause CMPA symptoms, and the evidences for prescribing maternal elimination diets for treating unspecific symptoms is weak22. Also, CMPA misdiagnosis may cause mothers to worry about the possibility that CMPA is caused by breastfeeding, ending up to interrupting it and switching to a formula- based feeding. This may bring serious consequences for the infant, who may not tolerate the formula feeding, which, in turn, can impact the their growth and nutrition, and also for the mother, as breastfeeding cessation is a cause of postpartum depression15,23. Altogether, these findings are particularly important, when it comes to a country like Brazil, where about 11 million individuals are diagnosed with CMPA, with four million new cases per year3. Given that most of Brazilian individuals are diagnosed with basis on their clinical features, the amount of money spent by public health services with provision of infant formulas, as well as impacts in health of both mothers and children may have a significant reduction, if measures for more accurate diagnosis of CMPA are implemented nationwide.
Although the OFC importance is evident here, and in the literature, this test is not devoid of risks7. In our study, reactions (including one case of anaphylaxis) occurred in a considerable number of OFC-positive children, and most were restricted to a single organ (Table 2). All these cases were managed rapidly and appropriately, without any further complication. There are few studies in the literature addressing the OFC’s safety. Anagnostou et al.24 assessed the safety of performing OFC in children up to two years of age and found that symptoms, when occurring, were mostly limited to the skin. The authors concluded that OFC in infants has acceptable risks. Since symptoms caused by OFC are not difficult to treat, and OFC is an easy, low-cost and feasible method, with proven benefits for CMPA screening, we also think that its risks are acceptable, if the test is carried out by strictly following the appropriate protocol.
Naturally, our study has limitations. First, the low number of patients seen in a single center is a cause of selection bias. Including a greater population and other centers would allow more reliable statistical analyses. Also, we were able to perform only the open OFC, and not the double-blinded OFC, which is the most reliable one2,17,18.. Still, even with a small sample size, we show that OFC application could identify a considerable fraction of patients who were misdiagnosed with CMPA, allowing our clinical staff to stop several expensive and unnecessary formula-based diets, which had a direct economic impact for the São Paulo State’s public health service.
We conclude that OFC was crucial for identifying misdiagnosed CMPA cases, especially when it comes to patients with non-IgE-mediated CMPA, for whom milk reintroduction (in tolerable amounts) in the diet is easier. Ruling out CMPA meant a substantial reduction in the prescription of infant formulas, which can bring positive outcomes for growth, nutrition, and development of children, as well as for the quality of life of both children and mothers. We show that stopping unnecessary formula-based diets can have a positive economic impact for public health systems by causing them to save great amounts of money that are spent on providing these formulas. OFC should be more spread through secondary healthcare units to increase the public access to this test.