Most triatomine bugs (Hemiptera: Reduviidae: Triatominae) are hematophagous, though 
Belminus species can live off of cockroach hemolymph to complete their life cycle. In this work 
we described the fixed action pattern (FAP) employed by B. ferroae to identify, approach and 
suck on a living cockroach. The FAP described here is composed of the following stereotyped 
behaviors: 1) visual and/or olfactory detection of the cockroach, 2) reaching, 3) cautious 
approach, 4) antennal exploration, 5) extension of the proboscis, 3) piercing to sedate, 5) walking  
away and waiting (post sedation behavior), 6) second cautious approach, 7) extension of the 
proboscis, 8) piercing to suck hemolymph. In order to identify chemicals cues that could elicit 
such FAP, we examined the behavior of B. corredori, B. ferroae and B. herreri in response to the 
cockroaches’ odor, fresh cockroach feces and fresh rodent wastes. The last two sources were 
tested based on the assumption that abundant chemicals near host refuges could serve as cues for 
host orientation. We found the cockroach odor emanating from a box significantly attracted B. 
herreri in a still air olfactometer. The three Belminus species approached the captive cockroach 
after one hour, but avoided to climb the box. Odors emanating from the cockroach feces attracted 
B. corredori and B. ferroae in a Y-olfactometer. The FAP sequence observed suggests Belminus 
bugs are not predators like the rest of reduviids (assassin bugs) —but are kleptophagous 
ectoparasites, since they do not attack and kill a prey but rather steal hemolymph from its 
invertebrate host. Triatomines and their hosts have intimately shared the same refuge for millions 
of years. Similar odors occur across invertebrate and vertebrate refuges, and are recurrent in 
human abodes, thus plausibly explaining how these kleptophagous bugs can readily switch to the 
domestic habitat.  

The Triatominae (Hemiptera: Reduviidae) or kissing bugs are the insect vectors of American 
trypanosomiasis or Chagas disease. More than 18 million people are infected and approximately 
120 million live at risk (Añez et al. 2004). However, according to an editorial published in The 
Lancet (Anonymous 2006), Chagas illness is the most neglected of neglected human diseases.  

Triatomine bugs have a unique way of life, they are nest-living ectoparasites (Guerin et al. 2000) 
and vectors of Trypanosoma cruzi (Kinetoplastida, Trypanosomatidae) –the causative agent of 
Chagas disease. Triatomines usually live closely associated with their host, sharing the same 
refuge and, constantly feeding on the same source during the course of their life. In natural 
conditions most triatomine species bite humans and other vertebrate hosts during the night while 
they sleep. These blood-sucking bugs acquire the zoonosis by biting an infected vertebrate host 
(e.g, opossums, armadillos and bats, among others). In the bug the parasite goes into a 
specialized stage, the epimastigote, which moves onto the rectum where it becomes infectious 
(Schofield et al. 1987). Infectious T. cruzi are called metacyclic trypomastigotes. Triatomines 
defecate during feeding or shortly after feeding, thus vectoring the parasites by defecating on 
another host. The trypomastigotes in the feces are capable of swimming into the host's cells 
using flagella. They enter the human host through the bite wound or by crossing mucous 
membranes. The parasite T. cruzi is able to live in the gut of all triatomines, however, some bug 
species are more efficient vectors than others due to different factors such as, triatomine density, 
host preference (Gütler et al. 2009) and defecation index –i .e., time between feeding and 
defecation (Aldana and Lizano 2004).  

Triatomines are a coherent taxonomic group among reduviids (Schaefer 2005). They are 
classified into 5 tribes and 15 genera including about 150 described species, most of which occur 
exclusively in America (Otálora-Luna et al. 2015). Triatomines exhibit behavioral and 
morphological features which distinguish them from most Reduviidae (or assassin bugs). 
Triatomines are unusual among Reduviidae because they are structurally adapted to 
hematophagy; although, not all are strict blood-sucking species, as we will show later. Reduviids 
are themselves an unusual family of the large order Hemiptera (or true bugs). Reduviids are 
unusual among the Hemiptera because almost all are terrestrial predators of other arthropods –
most other predatory Hemiptera are aquatic. It is widely accepted that triatomines derived or 
evolved from primitive zoophagous reduviids (Cobben 1979). However, there is controversy 
over whether this occurred once (monophyletic hypothesis) or more times (polyphyletic 
hypothesis) during evolution (Otálora-Luna et al. 2015). Schaefer (2005) strongly suggested that 
we can learn about the subfamily Triatominae by knowing such phylogenetic relationships. 
According to this author there is enough consistence between behavioral, physiological and 
morphological features around triatomines’ way of life to consider them a monophyletic or 
paraphyletic (i.e., a natural) group. However, taxonomists of Triatominae have drawn more 
attention to morphological traits than to behavioral patterns (Lent and Wygodzinsky 1979, Páez-
Rondón et al. 2019). In some cases taxonomic groups are indistinguishable in terms of their 
morphological features (Hutchinson 1965), but even the most morphologically similar species 
have distinguishable differences in their habits (Imanishi 2011). According to Imanishi, 
ethological studies might serve to distinguish taxonomic groups. Although, behavior is not an 
ordinary phenotypic attribute as not all behavioral traits are heritable, an important portion of 
behavior, i.e. instincts, can be considered part of triatomine phenotype and can be accurately 
measured if observational conditions are controlled following ethological precepts. According to 
Lorenz (1966) “coordination of movements” or “phylogenetically adapted motor patterns” 
characterize species and the concept of homology can be applied to them just as well as 
morphological descriptions. The approach followed in this study has departed from the 
mentioned ethological premises. We aim to learn about the subfamily Triatominae by describing 
behavioral characters as indicators of phylogenetic relationships. The pursuit of a distinctive 
behavioral pattern that is unique to Triatominae, i.e an autapomorphy, guided our current 
experimental model. In this respect, we chose the genus Belminus as an experimental model to 
identify an ethological feature that reveals phylogenetic relationships.  

The genus Belminus (Bolboderini) is among the least well-known groups of triatomines, and is 
composed of the species: Belminus corredori Galvão & Angulo, 2006; Belminus costaricensis 
Herrer, Lent & Wygodzinsky, 1954; Belminus ferroae Sandoval, Pabón, Jurberg & Galvão, 
2007; Belminus herreri Lent & Wygodzinsky, 1979; Belminus laportei Lent, Jurberg & 
Carcavallo, 1995; Belminus peruvianus Herrer, Lent & Wygodzinsky; 1954, Belminus pittieri 
Osuna &Ayala, 1993; and Belminus rugulosus Stål, 1859. The geographical distribution of these 
relatively small (compared to other species of) triatomines is discontinuous and known only from 
a scarce number of specimens captured in Central America, Colombia, Peru, Venezuela, and 
northern Brazil. B. peruvianus, B. herreri and B. ferroae have been reported vectoring T. cruzi 
inside human dwellings of Peru and Colombia (Sandoval et al. 2010). Very little is known about 
the genus Belminus, among other reasons, because it is difficult to maintain these species in 
captivity. The feeding behavior of Belminus bugs is currently being unveiled, and the most 
controversial revelation is that these peculiar species live off invertebrate hemolymph to 
complete their life cycle. They are facultative bloodsuckers but can survive by exclusively 
feeding on fluids of other arthropods. Sandoval et al. (2004, 2010) studies on B. herreri and B. 
ferroae concluded that cockroaches (Blattodea: Blaberidae) are the principal hosts in human 
abodes, although adults occasionally feed on humans. These authors captured B. herreri and B. 
ferroae in houses where cockroaches were present; >86% of the intestinal contents tested reacted 
with Periplaneta americana antiserum, while only a small proportion reacted to human blood 
antisera. Sandoval et al. (2013) demonstrated that B. ferroae showed a higher fitness when 
feeding on Blaberus cockroaches compared with mice, i.e. a higher adaptation to the invertebrate 
host.  

In this study, departing from an ethological approach, we aim to characterize Belminus genus 
taxonomically by identifying and observing behavioral patterns elicited by sensory cues 
emanating from the cockroach host. Given that Belminus are synanthropes and are involved in 
maintaining the life cycle of T. cruzi, there is no doubt about their eco-epidemiological 
relevance. But, there are phylogenetic concerns about the fact that Belminus, as members of 
Triatominae, are not strict bloodsuckers. Belminus species feed on blood, however they can 
complete their life cycle by exclusively feeding on arthropod hemolymph. Indeed, hemolymph is 
the primary source of food of Belminus species when living in human adobes, as mentioned 
above. Thus, hemaotophagia is not an obvious autapomorphy within Triatominae, which serves 
as evidence against monophyly of this subfamily. The feeding behavior that distinguishes 
Belminus would be a primitive habit among Reduviidae, which suggests that Belminus are 
phylogenetically closer to their primitive reduviid cousins, the assassin bugs, and more distant 
from bloodsucking triatomines. However, this bit of evidence add to previous bits of evidence, 
which according to Schaefer (2005) “point in so many directions at once that, in fact, they point 
in none and, so far, prove nothing”. In this work, instead of focusing on the quality of 
triatomines’ meals (blood or hemolymph) we focused on the natural history of their feeding 
behavior. We looked for a behavioral pattern that can be recognized as an autopomorphy, i.e. 
shared by Belminus and all triatomine species.  

When a kissing bug approaches to bite a host, it performs a highly stereotyped behavioral 
sequence called fixed action pattern (FAP) which is relatively invariant within Triatominae, and 
within Heteroptera. According to Páez-Rondón et al. (2018) different stimuli, such as 
temperature, chemical, visual and olfactory cues alone suffice to initiate the FAP associated with 
triatomine feeding. The behavioral sequence described by these authors starts with orientation 
to an object; subsequently the following behaviors are observed: visualization, exploring with 
the antennae, touching with the legs, extension of the proboscis and sucking of liquid. In this 
work, based on Páez-Rondón et al. (2018) discovery, we described the FAP employed by B. 
ferroae to identify, approach and suck a living cockroach. The “orientation” approach used by 
this author and in the current study, according to Roeder (1998), is somewhere between 
behaviorism (i.e., learning psychology) and ethology. Considering Crist (1998) criticism of the 
semantic style of the founders of ethology –and considering some stylistic elements used by the 
pioneers of the behavioral observation of animals (Darwin and Wallace 1858, Darwin 1983, 
Humboldt 1991)– we searched for the distinctive innate traits that might facilitate the 
phylogenetic placement of Belminus species. The primary question from an ethological 
perspective was: how do Belminus species approach their prey compared to the ancestral assassin 
bugs? Previous studies on triatomine orientation behavior have mainly focused on odors 
emanating from the host’s skin and breath (Otálora-Luna et al. 2004, Guerenstein and Lazzari 
2009, Aldana et al. 2008, Ortiz et al. 2011) which are by-products of the host-associated 
microflora and host metabolism of vertebrates. 

For many vertebrates, chemicals present in feces 
and urine constitute important signals that serve to mark their territory (Young and Henke 1999, 
Brennan 2001); sylvatic hosts such as opossums, armadillos and bats, as well as synantrophic 
host such as chickens dogs, cats and rodents cumulate excretory products in or near their nesting 
sites. Triatomines –as ectoparasites– use emanations from such host waste when searching for 
resources. Humans are not an exception; we have captured triatomine bugs in bathrooms, 
latrines, sewers and trashcans in rural and urban endemic areas (Aldana and Otálora-Luna 2019). 
Otálora-Luna and Guerin (2014) found that amines present in vertebrate waste (i.e. feces and 
urine) attract Rhodnius prolixus, Triatoma infestans and Panstrongylus geniculatus. To the best 
of our knowledge this is the first time host’s feces were considered as a source of kairomones, 
indicating a food source for triatomine bugs. These authors designed their experiments and 
addressed their conclusions hypothesizing that triatomines are ectoparasites closely associated 
with their host; normally sharing the same refuge. Given our ethological focus, in this study we 
performed a selection of odor sources based on our previous ectoparasite hypothesis (Otálora-
Luna and Guerin 2014) and our previous experimental model, i.e. observation of triatomine FAP 
(Páez-Rondón et al. 2018). In order to elucidate which chemical stimuli emanating from host 
excretions trigger the feeding instinct of Belminus, we assessed the orientation responses of B. 
corredori, B. ferroae and B. herreri to volatiles produced by cockroaches and host wastes, as 
well as rodent wastes. 

Summarizing, this study aimed to describe a) the FAP associated with feeding in Belminus, b) 
determine if host volatiles alone elicit the FAP or chemotaxis in Belminus, and c) propose such 
FAP as a character that distinguish Belminus and all triatomines from other reduviids. 

The fifth-instar individuals of Belminus species used in this study originated from laboratory 
colonies containing insects that were collected from domiciles in different localities of Colombia 
(Sandoval et al. 2004, Galvão and Angulo 2006, Sandoval et al. 2010). Collected bugs were 
captured from the following Colombian locations: B. ferroae specimens were captured in Santa 
Catalina (07°07′26″N, 72°11′24″) and San Alberto (17°12′40″N, 72°19′12″) in the municipality 
of Toledo, Northern Santander; B. herreri specimens were captured around a house in the 
municipality of El Carmen, Santander (6°39′30″N, 73°38′56″) and in dwellings in the 
municipality of San Martin, Cesar (07°58′47″N, 73°32′26″); and B. corredori specimens were 
captured in a house in San Gil, Santander (6°33′18″N, 73°04′00″). Colonies started in the 
laboratory during the following years: B. herreri in 2000, B. corredori in 2002 and B. ferroae in 
2005. Bugs were fed on cockroaches in laboratory conditions as described by Sandoval et al. 
(2013). Belminus colony has been at the premises of the Venezuelan Institute for Scientific 
Research (Mérida, Venezuela) for five years. Insects were kept at 23 ± 2°C, 82 ± 7% RH 
(relative humidity) in light dark cycle of 12/12 hours, and starved for 8–12 days from emergence 
before assays. They were fed 5th nymphs of Blaberus giganteus cockroaches (Blaberidae), which 
were fed food formulated for canines and corn seeds. Belminus bugs and cockroaches shared the 
same container since hatching for 5 months. Each bug was used only once to avoid bias from 
learning (Aldana et al. 2008). 

Three different arenas were used to study the behavior of Belminus species. Bioassays were 
conducted at 24 °C and 68% RH, and were illuminated by fluorescent ceiling lights (brightness 
2000 lux, color temperature 4000 K), unless otherwise specified. All experiments were 
performed in Merida, Venezuela, between 1700 and 1860 meters above the sea level. 

Arena 1: Ethological responses of B. ferroae were examined in a 10 cm Petri dish made of glass, 
where a 3-cm living B. giganteus nymph was enclosed with a B. ferroae bug (Fig 1Ai). Phase I: 
In the first part of the experiment the cockroach was confined in a 5.8 cm plate tight to the center 
of the arena with a low odor thermoplastic adhesive (tec bond 341, HotMelt), to avoid odor 
escaping from around the lid. Thus, only visual contact was allowed between the cockroach and 
the bug. The location and behavior of the cockroach and the triatomine were recorded for 10 
minutes. Phase II: The cockroach was released, so both individuals could physically interact for 
10 additional minutes. Controls: These consisted of a second series of two bioassays in which 
either the cockroach or the bug were absent. Each experiment was repeated 10 times.  

Arena 2: Orientation responses of B. corredori, B. ferroae and B. herreri to an odorous still air 
were tested in a square glass arena (29 x 29 cm). A living fifth instar B. giganteus was confined 
in an opaque-black cardboard box (length 6.5, wide 8 cm, height 2.5), placed in the center of a 
side (Fig 1B). The side of the box facing the center of the arena had 12 holes (dia. 2 mm). A 
similar empty box was placed as a control at the other end. Each bug was placed in a central 3 
cm circle. The bug, initially covered with a circular Petri dish (2.8 cm), was released after 2 min 
of adaptation. We noted which half of the arena the insect preferred during a 5 minute period. A 
bug was considered attracted to cockroach volatiles if it preferred the half of the arena where the 
cockroach was present. In a secondary phase of the bioassay, the position of the bug was noted 
after one hour of starting each experiment. A bug was considered attracted if it ended next to the 
box where the cockroach was present, i.e. no more than 3 cm far from the box. As some 
Belminus individuals may be reluctant to move for long periods (sometimes hours) after being 
manipulated, insects that did not leave the circle after five minutes were discarded (23%). 
Stimuli positions were interchanged every 2 insects; the arena was cleaned before making such 
changes. In order to test for asymmetries in the experimental setup Belminus bugs were observed 
in an odorless control trial, where two empty boxes were placed in the arena. Each experiment 
was repeated 20 times.  

Arena 3: Triatomine responses to an odorous air current were tested in a Y-tube dual choice 
olfactometer made of glass (Fig 1C). The three Belminus species were tested separately against 
volatiles emanating from 1) living cockroaches, 2) cockroach feces, and 3) mouse feces. One 
triatomine bug was allowed to a) walk upwind in the stem (length 22 cm, i.d. 2.370 cm, e.d 2.804 
cm), and once it reached the junction, b) made a choice between the two arms (length 13 cm) of 
the Y-olfactometer. Orientation was quantified by recording triatomines’ choice. All individuals 
walked from the base of the Y olfactometer and made a decision. A preliminary spatial control 
experiment with two clean arms was performed to test asymmetries, and no significant 
differences were found. A pump was used to draw charcoal-filtered air (stimulus controller, CS-
55, Syntech) from the two arms (10 ± 2 cm/s airspeed as measured by a hot-wire anemometer, 
2440, Kurtz, accuracy ± 0.01 m/s), one of which was connected to a 500 ml glass gas-wash 
bottle containing the odor source; the other one held a similar clean (control) bottle. Both air-
streams reached the ‘‘Y’’ stem (23± 2 °C and 70 % RH as measured by a thermo-hygrometer, 
EA80, Extech Instruments, accuracy ± 3% RH and ± 1 °C). Tubes, fittings and valves were made 
of polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE, International Polymer Solutions Inc). Headspace odors –i.e. 
volatiles emanating from the vapor phase above the sample in a vial– were tested by placing the 
odorous samples (see next section) in 500 ml glass gas-wash bottles. Bottles were left to 
equilibrate for at least 10 min before blowing volatiles, and an additional 15 minutes elapsed 
between experiments so cockroaches and wastes had time to emit more volatiles. Air blown over 
filter paper and rice hulls dampened with 5 ml of water served as controls for cockroach feces 
and mouse wastes respectively. The control for cockroaches consisted of a clean gas-wash bottle 
with a similar wet filter paper. Water served to add humidity to match the humidity produced by 
organic samples (Otálora-Luna and Guerin 2014). The air-stream passing through the bottles was 
injected at 150 ml/min. Bugs walking on the Y-olfactometer were stimulated until a response 
was observed, < 30 min. Flask positions were interchanged for every insect. The Y-
olfactomenter was cleaned before changing positions. In order to test for asymmetries in the 
experimental setup Belminus bugs were observed in an odorless control trial, where two empty 
bottles were tested. In order to remove odors from the laboratory the experimental setup was 
positioned near an exhaust hood, which was able to exchange the air in the room 15 times per 
hour. Mouse waste was not tested on B. herreri as this colony was not large enough to provide an 
adequate number of naïve individuals. 

Cockroach odors emanated from three living B. giganteus 5th nymphs. Cockroach feces were 
collected (20 g) and separated from extraneous material (e.g., dead insects, exuviae, oothecae 
and food waste) from the bottom of the containers used for mass-rearing of B. giganteus. Mouse 
wastes (30 g) consisted of rice hulls impregnated with feces and urine of these rodents (albino 
mice, strain NMRI). All samples were placed separately in 500 ml glass gas-wash bottles.  

To analyze behavioral details of Arenas 1-3, frontal and top views of the experimental arenas 
were filmed full-screen using a video CMOS camera (EOS Rebel T7i, Canon) equipped with a 
zoom lens (EF-S 15-55 mm f, IS, Canon) coupled to a macro lens (close-up +10, 58 mm, 
Commander) to obtain a field view of 40 mm (in the diagonal) –a pivoting base allowed to 
visually cover the entire arena. Experiments were conducted in a darkened room. The source of 
light for arenas 1 and 2 consisted of a LED lamp (2850K, 570 lumens, Reveal, General Electric). 
The source of light for arena 3 consisted of a LED infrared lamp (840 nm, Cmvision) –the 
infrared sensitivity of the camera allowed to observe the experiments in the dark. Recordings 
were analyzed by a computer video software (version 9.1.2.7, Wondershare Filmora9) for 
playback, tracking and editing. The ethological language used to describe triatomine behaviors 
followed suggestions of Kogon (1941) and Crist (1998). 

Comparisons of behavioral responses observed in the arena 1 were made using one-tailed 
binomial test. Comparison of behavioral responses for each species in the arenas 2 and 3 were 
made using two-tailed binomial test. A chi-square test of independence was performed to 
examine the relation between the Belminus species and orientation responses in arenas 2 and 3. 
When dependence resulted insignificant in the previous test, Belminus species were treated as a 
single group –as a genus– for a two-tailed binomial test. When dependence resulted significant, 
multiple chi-square pairwise comparisons were performed among species, after post hoc Holm-
Bonferroni correction (Ruxton and Beauchamp 2008). Statistical analyses were analyzed using R 
(version 3.5.3, Vienna, Austria; Ihaka and Gentleman 1996).  

Phase I: B. ferroae nymphs walked along the border (sidewall) of the 10-cm dish; showing 
positive thigmotaxis (Fig 1A). The bugs hardly ever edged the 5-cm dish, which contained the 
cockroach (two bugs, each on one occasion). Most bugs depicted a swinging walk along the 
perimeter of the former dish, alternating between clockwise and counterclockwise directions. 
This to-and-fro circuit approximated and rarely exceeded 180°. Triatomine walking bouts were 
not continuous but were punctuated by stops, which comprised 20% of the time. The cockroach 
showed several attempts to escape by moving into the confined space, occasionally ramming 
against the sidewall of the dish. There were no obvious sings of interaction between the 
triatomine and the cockroach despite their proximity.  
Phase II:  Shortly after being released the cockroach moved profusely and showed positive 
thigmotaxis; although walking tracks were discontinuous ―punctuated by stops. The bug 
interrupted the positive thigmotactic behavior and remained motionless for 5 seconds. Then the 
bug faced the cockroach and lifted the anterior part of its body (~40°) through an extension of its 
forelegs in order to reach higher with its antennae held up (~60° with respect to ground), a 
behavior referred to here as reaching. The bug continuously waved its antennae (i.e., semaphore 
movement, ~30°). Eventually, when the cockroach came to a halt, the bug stopped reaching and 
walked very cautiously to the cockroach (Fig 1B) by bending down the anterior part of its body 
through flexing of their forelegs (i.e., stalking). Thus, the triatomine walking velocity decreased 
substantially compared to the previous phase. The bug approached the abdomen of the cockroach 
and touched it with its antennas (i.e., antennal exploration). Then the bug extended the 
proboscis, pierced the cockroach abdomen briefly (~2 seconds), and finally walked away. 
Proboscis flexibility allowed the bug to pierce the cockroach from below (Fig 1Ca). After 10 
seconds of being pierced, the cockroach experienced alternating spasms with slow, clumsy and 
erratic movements. The cockroach displayed obvious sings of disorientation. In such condition, 
the cockroach did not show positive thigmotaxis but rather slow wide-ranging movements. The 
occasion was seized to approach the cockroach in the same manner as before –the triatomine 
bug walked cautiously and eventually inserted the stylets. This time the bug sucked cockroach 
hemolymph for 2 minutes; repeating this kleptophagic behavior on two or more occasions. The 
triatomine abdomen swelled prominently. Summarizing the description of Belminus’ FAP we 
categorized the following stereotyped behaviors: 1) visual and/or olfactory detection of the 
cockroach, 2) reaching, 3) cautious approach, 4) antennal exploration, 5) extension of the 
proboscis, 3) piercing to sedate, 5) walking away and waiting (post sedation behavior), 6) second 
cautious approach, 7) extension of the proboscis, 8) piercing to suck hemolymph. The sequences 
6-8 were repeated more than once. The cockroach did not die.  

Controls: During the control experiments, where only one of the two insects was present, the 
triatomine bug and the cockroach showed similar behaviors to those observed in the phase I.  

The FAP described in the phase II was not observed during the phase I or during the two 
controls (P<0.001). 

During the first 5 min B. herreri orientated their walks toward the cockroach (78%, P=0.012), 
however B. corredori (65%, P=0.169) and B. ferroae (58%, P=0.193) orientation did not 
significantly differ from random (Fig 2). The chi-square test of independence showed that the 
three species did not behave differently (P=0.501). Thus, when we tested the three species a as 
group (n=56); Belminus genus oriented its walk towards the cockroach (68%, P=0.0029). 

Eventually, after 1 hour, all individuals from the three species ended up approaching the box 
(100%, P<0.001), and remained 0.5-3 cm close, but the odors or vibrations induced by the 
captive cockroach prevented the bugs from contacting the box. Bugs made explorative 
approaches to the box, by touching it with antennae and brief walks, but eventually desisted from 
climbing. The FAP or proboscis extension were not observed in this arena, only chemotaxis 
was observed. 

Controls: During the odorless control experiments, where two empty boxes were tested on B. 
corredori (n=20), orientation did not significantly differ from random (left: 9, right: 11, 
P=0.160).  

The FAP or proboscis extension were not observed in the Y-olfactometer, only chemotaxis was 
observed in certain cases. When one arm of the Y-olfactometer was provided with the headscape 
of living cockroaches and the other with clean air, B. corredori (P=0.005), B. ferroae (P=0.04) 
and B. herreri (P=0.014) avoided the odorous air current (Fig 3). The chi-square test of 
independence showed that there was no significant relation between species and behavioral 
responses (P=0.347); Belminus genus (n=52) avoided volatiles emanating from cockroaches 
(79%, P=0.000013). 

Similarly, B. corredori (P=0.001) and B. ferroae (P=0.008) avoided the extreme of the Y-
olfactometer when provided with the headscape of mouse wastes (Fig 3). The chi-square test of 
independence showed that there was no significant relation between species and behavioral 
responses (P=0.477); Belminus genus (n=48) avoided volatiles emanating from mouse wastes 
(79%, P=0.000023). 

However, volatiles emanating from cockroach feces attracted B. corredori (P=0.019) and B. 
ferroae (P=0.003), while B. herreri did not show attraction or avoidance behaviors (P=0.0541). 
The chi-square test of independence showed that there was a significant relation between species 
and behavioral responses (P=0.0208). When performing multiple pairwise comparisons, chi-
square tests showed that the behavioral responses of B. corredori and B. ferroae were not 
different (P=0.766), the behavioral responses of B. corredori and B. herreri were not different 
(P=0.0683), and the behavioral responses of B. ferroae and B. herreri were different (P=0.0392) 
(Fig 3).  

Controls: During the odorless control experiments, where two empty flasks were tested on B. 
corredori (n=22), orientation did not significantly differ from random (left: 12, right: 10, 
P=0.154). 

Páez-Rondón et al. (2018) exposed R. prolixus, T. infestans and P. geniculatus to a drop of 
water, a plastic dummy and a piece of guava fruit, and discovered that all of these objects elicit 
the FAP associated with feeding. In this study, we report for the first time such behavioral 
pattern in Belminus –from an ethological point of view– which reveals the novelty of our work. 

Furthermore, according to Tinbergen (1963) an ethologist will attempt to recognize elements of 
animal’s own behavior; we showed that kleptophagy is a phenomena proper (sensu Portmann 
1967, Kleisner 2008, Kleisner 2015, Aldana and Otálora-Luna 2019) of Belminus genus and the 
rest of triatomines. The manner in which Belminus bugs approached the cockroach, performing a 
highly stereotyped sequence that ended in proboscis lifting and sucking, and that did not result in 
the immediate death of the host, defines its phyloegentic relationship within Triatominae.  

Belminus bite was not toxic to the cockroach but rather analgesic. Furthermore, when rearing 
Belminus triatomines in our laboratory we have observed that a single cockroach is able to 
survive after being bitten by a dozens of these bugs for many months (data not shown). Most 
predator reduviids have highly toxic venoms which kill the prey immediately (Walker et al. 
2018). Triatomine saliva is not that toxic but is able to inhibit voltage-gated sodium channels 
which may account for the anesthetic effect (Walker et al. 2016). From these physiological 
studies and our ethological observations we might conclude that Belminus are not able to kill its 
prey but to parasite its host. The use of the terms parasite and host could be debated since 
triatomines do not live directly on the host –as ticks, lice or fleas. However, triatomines closely 
share their lives with their hosts, in the same refuge, and that is why Guerin et al. (2000) called 
them ectoparasites. Alternatively, we could also call triatomines carnivores (Cobben 1979, 
Livingstone et al. 1998), zoophagous (Boyd et al. 2002) or micropredators (Poulin and 
Randhawa 2013, Wilson et al. 2017). But these categories are less concrete; for example, 
contrary to mosquitos, which have been catalogued as micropredators, triatomines live closely 
associated with their host. In any case, the purpose that prevails here is to behaviorally and 
phylogenetically distinguish triatomines from the rest of reduviids. The parasitic strategy 
(kleptophagy) described in this study is found only in one taxon (Triatominae), but not found in 
any other outgroup reduviid taxa (Reduviidae subfamilies). 

Another aspect worth considering is the form of the proboscis of triatomines which is very 
different from the rest of reduviids (Lent and Wygodzinsky 1979). Reduviids have a hook-
shaped proboscis that when extended points downwards. However, the triatomine proboscis is 
straight and possesses a membranous joints, a treat used by Lent and Wygodzinsky (1979) to 
distinguish the Triatominae from other reduviid subfamilies. This morphological feature is 
associated with the hematophagous –and kleptophagous– habit that distinguish triatomines. 
Belminus bugs used such proboscis flexibility to pierce the cockroach from below in arena 1. 
The proboscis behavior performed by Belminus and all triatomines is not possible within 
predator reduviids which have a hook-shaped proboscis solely capable of piercing its prey 
from above. Cobben (1979) regards triatomines as an “advanced” subfamily within Reduviidae 
according to this mouth-part structure and function. Such morphologic-behavioral coupling 
(sensu Varela 1988) illustrates a structural adaptation (sensu Croizat 1962, Greham 1984, 
Otálora-Luna et al. 2017), and deserves special consideration as it might be tracing the course 
of evolution of kleptophagy in these insects (Aldana et al. 2019). 

Belminus is able to detect thermal cues as they feed on humans and other homoeothermic 
vertebrates. But, they prefer poikilothermic arthropods as hosts (Sandoval et al. 2013), whose 
temperature rarely exceeds that of warm-blood vertebrates. Wigglesworth and Gillett (1934 a,b) 
suggested that triatomines are attracted to their host mainly by warmth. Vinauger et al. (2013) 
stated that “heat constitutes the only necessary and sufficient signal to trigger the PER” or 
proboscis extension response (Flores and Lazzari 1996). Haridass and Ananthakrishnan (1980) 
stated that “unlike predatory reduviids, in the hematophagous T. rubrofasciata, feeding behavior 
is elicited only by a temperature gradient arising from their vertebrate hosts, as is also the case 
with other blood feeding insects”. In disagreement with these statements we suggest that feeding 
behavior in all Triatomine subspecies is not solely driven by heat. In line with previous studies, 
visual, olfactory and tactile stimuli can also trigger the FAP (Páez-Rondón et al. 2018). In this 
study we confirmed that non-thermal stimuli from poikilothermic insects elicit positive taxis and 
the FAP in Belminus species. Such elicitation flexibility of stimuli for triggering orientation 
behaviors and the FAP was decisive in the change of behavior that permitted the primitive 
predateous reduviids to become kleptophagous, driving the evolution of Triatominae. 
Presumably, early triatomines fed on abundant soft invertebrates in the nests and burrows of 
vertebrates, then later encountered their defenseless newly born offspring, tasted them, extended 
the proboscis, punctured and penetrated their skin (Otálora-Luna et al. 2015). The peculiar form 
and flexibility of triatomine proboscis appeared, the quality of their saliva became less toxic and 
more analgesic, and their FAP acquired a kleptopagous aspect (sensu Portmann 1967), thus 
triatomines became an advanced group among Reduviidae. Eventually, this elicitation flexibility 
also facilitated the process of domestication of several sylvatic species, like Belminus sp. 

The feeding FAP observed here is derived from an ancestral pattern of hemipterans. Hatfield et 
al. (1983) described similar sequential behaviors associated with feeding in the phytophagous 
bug Lygus lineolaris (Hemiptera: Miridae). Haridass et al. (1987) distinguish a series of 
categories where reduviids can be grouped based on their approaching behaviors during feeding: 
(i) 'blood feeding' type, (ii) 'sticky-trap' type, (iii) 'raptorial' type, (iv) 'wait and grab' type, (v) 'pin 
and jab' type and (vi) 'chase and pounce' type. Reduviid predators exhibit an “assessing” and 
“ambush” strategy (Edwards 1962, Ables 1978), which is different from the FAP described for 
Belminus vis à vis the way the victim is handled. A typical member of the Harpactocorinae sits 
"pinned” and waits for a prey to arrive on a flower to “jab” it (Haridass et al. 1988, Ambrose 
1999). Edwards (1962) described the feeding FAP for the harpactocorine Rhinocoris carmelita 
and the reduviine Platymeris rhadamanthus as follow: arousal, orientation, fixation, approach, 
(facultative) pounce, extension of rostrum, grasping, apprehension, insertion of styletes and 
injection of saliva. Srikumar et al. (2014) described the feeding FAP for harpactorine reduviid 
predators as follow: arousal, approach, capture, rostral thrust, paralyzing, sucking, and post-
predatory behaviors. Other authors have described similar behavioral sequences in Reduviidae 
(Ables 1978, Haridass and Ananthakrishnan 1980). Ables (1978) observed that “smaller, more 
mobile prey are usually ‘ambushed’, whereas larger, less mobile prey are ‘stalked’” and “when 
prey were detected the predator became motionless with the fore tibiae raised and the antennae 
extended.” This author added that “initial contact with prey usually consisted of antennation and 
then insertion of the predator's proboscis”. According to Srikumar et al. (2014) “after prey were 
pinned and jabbed, the reduviids paralyzed them by injecting toxic saliva”. Some reduviid 
species transport the prey beneath leaves and twigs to a safe and secluded place before sucking 
out its body fluids (Srikumar et al. 2014). Sometimes they grip it with the fore and mid-legs until 
the victim succumbs (Edwards 1962). 

Such ambushing, grasping, dragging, apprehension, paralyzing and similar murderous behaviors 
were not observed in Belminus bugs. The paralyzing (lethal) effect elicited by assassin bugs 
differs from the sedation effect caused by Belminus, as the latter do not pursue to kill but to 
ectoparasite. Triatomines have adapted to live together with their hosts. It should be stressed that 
cockroaches eventually recover from lethargy after being sucked, and shall survive for upcoming 
bites. Thus, Belminus species are not predators like the rest of reduviids. Belminus are not 
assassin bugs. As with other triatomine species, Belminus are not real hunters but thieves, i.e., 
ectoparasites that take advantage of the least carelessness of the host to steal its fluids.  

This suggest that kleptophagy is an ethological (i.e. taxonomic, phylogenetic and evolutionary) 
characteristic of Belminus as well as of Triatominae. Since, Belminus are not strict 
hematophagous, this trait might deserve taxonomic revision. We propose to consider 
kleptophagy as an attribute that groups triatomines. Kleptophagy is a non-aggressive behavior 
which contrast with the violent predatory behaviors that characterize ancestral reduviids. 

Immelmann (1983) underline that while appetitive behavior might contain taxis components as 
well as FAP, not all taxis derive in FAP. Clearly, the FAP requires an external stimulus to be 
triggered but different modalities alone could be sufficient. In arena 1, phase 1, visual cues –if 
apparent to Belminus bugs– were not sufficient to trigger the FAP or host mediated taxis. 
Probably, the bug was not able to see the cockroach through the glass. However, we have 
previously observed that a visual cue –a plastic dummy resembling a drop of water– is sufficient 
to elicit the FAP (Páez-Rondón et al. 2018). It is difficult to stablish which cues elicited the FAP 
when the glass barrier was removed (phase 2) but, certainly the FAP was triggered until 
completion by the presence of the host, and probably visual cues played an important role in this 
opportunity. Extension of the fixed bug’s proboscis to the cockroach and sucking observed in 
arena 1 may be catalogued as a reflexes (Páez-Rondón et al. 2018). Approach to the cockroach 
(arena 1), to the black box containing the cockroach (arena 2) and positive decisions made in the 
Y-tube (arena 3) may be catalogued as taxis. Taxis, proboscis extension and sucking are clearly 
part of the FAP, and at some point there is a superposition of all of them (Tinbergen 1951, 
Lorenz 1977, Eibl-Eibesfeldt I 1979). While, olfaction was required in arenas 2 and 3 to elicit 
taxis behavior, it was not sufficient to elicit the FAP. 

For future studies, we suggest to test olfaction and visual cues alone, using a cockroach dummy 
or providing multimodal stimuli on the servosphere –to see whether olfaction is sufficient –or 
only required– to elicit FAP. We also suggest to combine different stimuli to clarify how 
convergence between visual (different light treatments) and olfactory cues works (Reisenman et 
al. 2000, Otálora-Luna and Dickens 2011). 

Only B. herreri showed significant attraction to the black box where the cockroach was confined, 
during the first 5-min period in the still-air olfactometer. Thus, this species was able to detect the 
cockroach in still air conditions at 10 cm (78%, arena 2). Interestingly, the three species were 
attracted to the cockroach odors after one hour. Probably, B. corredori and B. ferroae reached 
the box containing the cockroach by chance after one hour of trial-and-error, but it is worth to 
note that all tested bugs continued walking close to this box after that hour, thus a short-range 
attraction effect can be inferred from this experiment; although proboscis extension was never 
observed. They made attempts to climb the box, but cockroach’s movements, and probably 
pungent odors, caused the triatomine bugs to keep a distance. Such Belminus’ avoidance reaction 
merits further ethological and physiological consideration. The difference between the initial 
attraction and the attraction at the end of an hour could also indicate that the cockroaches were 
not the preferred host, suggesting that there is a greater latency to react to cues emitted by 
cockroaches. Probably, these Belminus species have different hosts in nature. Our knowledge of 
Belminus' sylvatic life is very limited. For future studies, we suggest improvement of these 
arenas in order to test olfaction alone, without any visual cues, to determine whether olfaction is 
sufficient (or only required) to elicit the FAP. We also recommend sampling and observing 
Belminus bugs living in natural conditions, a real challenge!  

Belminus species were not attracted to volatiles emitted by cockroaches in the Y-olfactometer, 
and indeed the three species B. corredori, B. ferroae and B. herreri avoided this odor. This result 
was surprising as the three Belminus bugs tested in this study have lived exclusively off 
cockroach hemolymph. The cockroaches acted stressed, i.e. exhibiting compulsive movements, 
in the olfactometer flask probably due to the negative pressure produced by the air flow. 
Possibly, they were producing allomones (i.e., defensive volatile secretions) during the 
experiments (Schal 1992), which might explain the avoidance behaviors observed here. Mouse’s 
wastes were also avoided by B. corredori and B. ferroae. Avoidance of mice feces might be due 
to potential predation by this vertebrate. However, both species were attracted to volatiles 
emanating from cockroach feces. Sandoval et al. (2004, 2010, 2013) demonstrated that Belminus 
species are much better adapted to cockroaches than to mice. These authors found domestic 
Belminus species closely living in, and feeding on, cockroaches in human houses. In nature, 
sylvatic Belminus are probably associated with insect-hosts living under rocks or in tree barks, or 
are associated with invertebrates living inside vertebrate refuges such as caves, borrows, nests, 
etc. Our result confirmed the hypothesis proposed previously by Otálora-Luna and Guerin (2014) 
–volatiles from host wastes (i.e. cockroach feces) emanating from host refuges stimulate 
triatomines searching behavior.   

But, which volatiles are emitted by cockroach feces? Besides specific pheromones (Schal 1992), 
nitrogenous compounds such as ammonia, methylamine, dimethylamine and trimethylamine 
(Sakuma and Fukami 1990) as well as carboxylic acids such as acetic, propionic, isobutyric, 
butyric, isovaleric and valeric acid (McFarlane and Alli 1985) are major components of the 
excreta of cockroaches, many of which elicit searching behaviors in other triatomine species 
(Guerenstein and Lazzari 2009, Ortiz et al. 2011, Otálora-Luna and Guerin 2014). Ammonia 
attracts triatomines and emanates in large amounts from both vertebrate feces (Otálora-Luna and 
Guerin 2014) as well as from cockroaches’ feces (Mullins and Cochrand 1972). Belminus 
avoidance responses to mice wastes and attraction responses to cockroach feces suggest that 
Belminus species might recognize unknown specific as well as known general volatiles (e.g. 
ammonia, CO2, carboxylic acids, aromatics, etc.) emitted by excretory products of their host. 
Odors from vertebrate and invertebrate hosts, while sharing several molecules, produce 
ambivalent effects depending on the dose, combination with other molecules, combination with 
other modalities (e.g. visual cues), physiological state of the insect, among other factors. For 
example, we know that isobutyric acid and ammonia have different behavioral effects on 
triatomines depending on the dose. They evoke repellency and scape responses when released “
suddenly” at high doses but are attractive at low doses (Schofield 1975, Guerenstein and Guerin 
2001, Otálora-Luna and Guerin 2014). Such parsimony or use of the same chemical as a releaser 
of different behaviors is common in arthropods (Blum 1996). This might explain how the 
cockroach in arena 1 elicited the FAP while the cockroach in the box (arena 2) or in the bottle 
(arena 3) did not elicited the FAP. Probably, the visual and/or physical (tactile) presence of the 
cockroach was required as volatiles were not sufficient.  

The use of waste odors to find resources is a structural adaptation widespread in triatomines, 
given that the associated volatile organic compounds are end-products derived from generally 
occurring metabolites of vertebrate and invertebrate gut flora metabolism and, as such, do not 
vary greatly between hosts (Otálora-Luna and Guerin 2014). These compounds could play an 
important role in house invasion by triatomine, as has been mentioned elsewhere (Otálora-Luna 
and Guerin 2014). Belminus species could well make use of the same general chemical cues they 
use to locate wild hosts for the exploitation of synanthropic invertebrates (e.g., cockroaches) 
since similar odors occur across invertebrates and vertebrates, thus plausibly explaining how 
these small triatomines can readily switch to the domestic habitat (Otálora-Luna and Guerin 
2014, Otálora-Luna et al. 2016).  

Strict blood-feeding has been considered a behavioral feature that group Triatominae (Lent and 
Wygodzinsky 1979). However, as Belminus does not strictly depend on blood, such taxonomic 
character must be revised. The inconsistency does not necessarily compromises the systematic 
identification of the group. A proper behavioral category shall comprise Belminus as a 
triatomine. As kleptophagy is hitherto an advanced and unusual feature in Hemiptera and in 
Reduviidae itself, we believe Triatominae is a single evolutionary unit that has evolved only 
once –i.e. Triatominae is monophyletic (sensu Schaefer 2005). During the course of evolution 
Belminus bugs have selected and adapted those behavioral sequences that fit better to a) their 
ancestral constraints (Triatominae), b) physiological needs (carnivorous) and c) ecological 
scenarios (ectoparasitism). One surmises that kleptophagic behaviors of Belminus species 
detailed here have contributed to their match to the synanthropic niche. The presence of 
cockroaches in human houses facilitates Belminus species adaptation to the human habitat, where 
both cockroaches and humans are potential targets.  

A better ethological –behavioral, systematic, evolutionary, etc.– understanding of the 
Triatominae is essential for the development of novel control programs. In particular, the study 
of instinctive behaviors of Belminus and other triatomine species is critical in the design of 
experiments aimed at improving control technologies. 

We wish to acknowledge Suzannah ‘Suzi’ Faulkner who improved the manuscript with her 
comments. This work was supported by a Fonacit grant to Claudia Sandoval. This manuscript is 
part of the Ph.D. thesis of Oscar Páez Rondón to be submitted at the University of Los Andes, 
Venezuela.  
