Publication status: Preprint has been published in a journal as an article
DOI of the published article: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202339253894
Play to aspire and create new realities
José Carlos Lopes, Daniela Vendramini-Zanella, Valdite Pereira Fuga
https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3519
Submitted on: 2022-01-21
Posted on: 2022-01-21 (version 1)
(YYYY-MM-DD)
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
D.O.I   
 
Play to aspire and create new realities 
O brincar para aspirar e criar novas realidades 
 
José Carlos Barbosa Lopes1  
Daniela Vendramini-Zanella2 
Valdite Pereira Fuga3 
 
Abstract  
 
This paper discusses core principles such as play, collaboration, and agency that support the 
online workshops offered by the Global Play Brigade (GPB), an international community of 
activists from different areas, who got together to fight against the global crisis that threatened 
the world in so many ways due to the covid-19 pandemic. To exemplify part of the theoretical 
and methodological approach involved in the plan and, the workshop, as well as its goals and 
one of the sessions, will be described along with perspectives aligned to Spinoza, Vygotsky, 
Freire, and some other authors to promote understanding of how people can be affected 
towards social change. It is known that there are many facets to the current turmoil, so the 
GPB seeks to create spaces in which creativity and critical thinking can create possibilities for 
emotional support, development, hope, and action. 
Keywords: Play, collaboration, agency, affectus 
 
1 Faculdade de Tecnologia de São Paulo and Faculdade Méliès. São Paulo − Brasil. 
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8039-6919. E-mail: zecarlos.bl@gmail.com 
2 English Department - Universidade de Sorocaba (UNISO). Sorocaba − Brasil.  
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0331-545X.  E-mail: daniela.zanela@gmail.com 
3 Faculdade de Tecnologia Mogi das Cruzes. Mogi das Cruzes − Brasil. 
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-3013-6254. E-mail: valpefuga@gmail.com 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3519
Resumo 
Este artigo discute princípios fundamentais como brincar, colaboração e agência que são base 
para os workshops online oferecidos pela Global Play Brigade (GPB), uma comunidade 
internacional de ativistas em diferentes áreas, que se uniram para lutar contra a crise global 
que ameaçava o mundo de diferentes maneiras devido à pandemia da covid-19. Para 
exemplificar parte da abordagem teórico-metodológica envolvida no plano, o próprio 
workshop e seus objetivos, uma das sessões será descrita juntamente com perspectivas 
alinhadas a Spinoza, Vygotsky, Freire e alguns outros autores para entender como as pessoas 
podem ser afetadas no intuito de mudança social. É notório que a turbulência atual apresenta 
muitas facetas, por isso o GPB busca criar espaços nos quais a criatividade e o pensamento 
crítico possibilitem suporte emocional, desenvolvimento, esperança e ação. 
Palavras-chave: brincar, colaboração, agência, affectus 
 
1. Introduction 
 
The year 2020 dramatically changed the history of humankind. This fact not only refers to the 
impact of the coronavirus all over the world, but also turns the spotlight onto some open 
wounds caused by social inequality, which we have not yet been able to heal. This worldwide 
crisis made us face that what we have accomplished so far might not keep us away from so 
many kinds of threats to our existence. The only hope is to fight against opposing forces, such 
as racism, exploitation, violence, prejudice, and the like. We urgently need to stand up for the 
planet we live in and (re)think the ways we lead our lives as residents (Krenak, 2020). 
 
Such need is one of the principles that motivated the Global Play Brigade (GPB)1 to bring 
together artists, improvisers, educators, musicians, clowns, therapists, and other activists from 
almost 40 countries to offer free online workshops to people across the globe. Once ZOOM, 
WhatsApp, and Facebook were some of the technological tools that could connect people 
back in March of 2020, when the pandemic spread worldwide, these activists, better known as 
Brigadiers, launched a website with a vast list of activities available to anyone who was 
struggling to keep social distancing measures and somehow became related to the topics 
addressed. 
 
 
1 For further information: https://www.globalplaybrigade.org/ 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3519
Since then, the GPB has offered free Play and Talk workshops in different languages and time 
zones around the world. As stated in the GPB Mission, these sessions offer people a chance to 
play, improvise, grow, and tell stories together. It is a place to share and listen to others while 
everyone is going through a crisis. From kids to adults, the GPB has tried to embrace people 
virtually, as that was not possible physically, in an attempt to experience joy, pain, reflection, 
creativity, and affection through play in a way they can change their immediate reality first, 
but also aim at long-term outcomes.  
 
In Brazil, this happened with group Brincadas2, an initiative that the LACE Research Group3 
decided to launch when the researcher group leader, Fernanda Liberali, joined the GPB. Soon 
after, Brincadas became a Brazilian community that both offered support to educators, 
principals, coordinators, parents, and students in school contexts and provided food, medicine, 
and conversation to people in need. The group also provided other intervention services 
through national campaigns and international sponsors, such as donating masks and other 
personal protective clothing and equipment to health professionals, who had to fight covid-19, 
but did not have enough support from the government at that time. 
 
LACE Research Group’s actions derive from its fundamentals in Applied Linguistics (AL), 
an area of study that questions everyday attitudes to life through language and how it 
constitutes human beings and all their activities in social interactions. It is crucial for AL 
studies to take a critical stance towards social issues, building bridges with different areas 
such as Education, Psychology, Sociology, Philosophy, among others (Moita Lopes, 2006). 
The aim of AL is to combine new discourses and ways to create reality through multiple 
forms of saying, feeling, acting, that is to say, being in the world. LACE is also aligned to a 
socio-historical-cultural approach in a vygotskian conceptualization, which will be discussed 
in this paper. 
 
Considering this scenario, two Brazilian Higher Education professors, members of the LACE 
Research Group, joined the GPB as Brigadiers, and decided to offer a workshop in which 
their college students could practice some English language skills and talk to professionals in 
other countries. These participants were also invited to discover what they could do towards 
 
2 For further information: https://is.gd/6zBPTJ 
3 LACE stands for Language in Activity in the School Context. This Research Group is based at the Pontifical 
Catholic University of São Paulo, Brazil (PUCSP), which is led by Professors Maria Cecília Camargo 
Magalhães and Fernanda Coelho Liberali. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3519
global collaboration, being mindful of the crisis everyone was going through simultaneously, 
though feeling it differently, at that moment. The workshop was held in July, gathering 
around fifteen participants on ZOOM, who shared their personal and professional experiences 
while playing and talking for an hour. 
 
Based on that workshop, this paper aims to discuss some theoretical and practical concepts, 
namely collaboration and play, which are key to the GPB and thus essential to the session 
offered as well. Collaboration, grounded in the Critical Collaborative Research (Magalhães & 
Fidalgo, 2019), highlights co-authorship and co-construction among all the participants 
involved in a certain activity. In this play session, for example, participants mutually 
collaborated in the activities proposed by exchanging their own experience, interacting with 
the resources available, and understanding that the way everyone is affected by the diversity 
in the group is essential for collective growth. 
 
Play (Vygotsky, 2001; Holzman, 2009), another key concept to this discussion, provides 
encounters in which participants have to deal with rules, the unknown in an online context, 
and some agency according to the conflicts raised in the session. As such, this paper discusses 
and exemplifies how participants could experience these principles, just as they were thought 
out in the workshop plan and later referred to by participants in certain moments in the 
session. By aligning these concepts to some of the testimonials, we can infer that play is a 
powerful intervention resource to create what Freire (1970) proposed as the viable unheard of, 
that is, the potential to transform reality. 
 
As a core principle in the GPB, play aims at social change in a broad spectrum. Participants 
share their everyday life experiences while playing and expand them to a global perspective 
as well, through creativity and connection created in the workshops (Vygotsky, 2004). They 
are about hope, emotional support, and development as participants play and talk to find 
possibilities beyond the crisis. This approach in the GPB community seeks to offer 
opportunities to question, imagine, and create new realities as a response to dehumanization 
and the deterioration of ecosystems. 
 
2. A collaborative perspective in the workshop 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3519
As the GPB launch happened on June 8, 2020, workshops started to be offered and Brigadiers 
could join any of the weekly meetings to exchange ideas, experience some improvisational 
games, play and performance tools or social therapy sessions themselves. This provided them 
with some emotional growth and support to carry on the activities and actions announced on 
the GPB website. During such meetings, Brigadiers also had a chance to partner with 
(an)other Brigadier(s) to discuss their plans for a session they decided on facilitating. In one 
of these meetings, two Brigadiers who worked as English professors in government owned 
colleges in the state of São Paulo, Brazil, decided to team up with another colleague in the 
same institution to offer a workshop entitled Global Collaboration: What can young 
professionals do? 
 
The decision to offer such workshop was made in July, 2020, at the end of a difficult semester 
in which their students in areas such as Logistics, Human Resources, Commercial 
Management, Systems Analysis, and Business had not yet understood all the huge changes in 
their courses routines, let alone the uncertainty of the job market. Thus, the objective of the 
workshop was to help participants share their fears regarding speaking English online to a 
stranger as well as finding out what people were doing worldwide to deal with the crisis. 
Hopefully, this would help participants critically understand different views, take a stance and 
collaborate in whatever way they could.  
 
The three Brazilian professors that planned the workshop invited young professionals4 from 
different areas to join the workshop as guests. Some of them were living abroad, so they could 
genuinely answer the question addressed in the workshop What can young professionals do? 
The other participants, mostly their college students who were intermediate learners of 
English, would take part in a play session. It would be quite different from their learning 
experience in class because, compared to their space of language practice, they would have 
more freedom and could take risks. 
 
This context, prior to the workshop, is understood as collaborative itself, as it implies people 
working together and mutually supporting one another. Such an environment demands trust 
and dedication from each party to achieve a common objective shared by the group. These 
characteristics follow the philosophical trail, proposed by Spinoza (2003, IV, p. 9), which 
 
4  Participants agreed to share their data according to the Research Ethics Committee. (CAAE: 
34700720.4.0000.5482). October 15th, 2020.  
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3519
says that when “(…) two individuals of entirely the same nature are united, they form a 
combination twice as powerful as either of them singly”. In this sense, the collaborative 
perspective implies engaging with others towards some common ground to enhance 
everyone’s potential for existence, that is, finding out ways to interact, which enable 
collective and individual growth. 
 
In the Critical Collaborative Research (PCcol) (Magalhães, 2009) perspective, this movement 
is understood as intervention in practice, in which the participants involved are active in the 
production of knowledge. Also, PCcol highlights voluntary engagement, promotes critical 
participation and brings multiple voices to the research context. These multiple voices in 
collaboration trigger contradictions and tensions, which are essential to unleash critical 
reflection and possible transformations to the context. The confrontations that operate in the 
world of social relations can be justified in and by language, which is the central issue in AL 
studies. This collaborative perspective highlights an engaged attitude through shared work, 
built by the sum of efforts of those involved. 
 
Considering all these issues, the workshop was organized according to some of the guidelines 
drawn up by the GPB community, namely: 
 
• Opening Song. 
• Greetings, GPB opening script and a brief orientation of ZOOM tools. 
• Play/Talk session. 
• Thanks and GPB closing script. 
• Closing Song. 
 
For this specific workshop the facilitators chose to offer a play and talk session in a way 
participants would feel more comfortable to use English in a combination of settings, rather 
than a one-hour lecture, which is not a GPB practice. However, there was a chance that such 
lecture would take place because of learners’ inhibitions, as the learners who were taking part 
in the workshop were not familiar with interacting with strangers in English. There were five 
interconnected activities that involved play and talk, so that core principles such as 
collaboration, affect, and agency could somehow be addressed in the talk and shared in the 
play settings.  
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3519
 
This approach to the workshop considers the multimodal resources available on ZOOM, 
which enable interactions among participants such as audio, video, and written text in the 
chat. Revisiting Vygotsky (2004), intentionality is always present to the facilitator in a 
collaborative learning space because the facilitator is responsible for arranging available 
resources to encourage participation. In this session, for example, play and talk were the main 
forms of participation planned by facilitators, who were the professors that organized the 
workshop. 
 
As a result, facilitators organized the sequence of activities, namely the opening and closing 
songs as well as the way play and talk were aligned to the topic of global collaboration. Thus, 
the young professionals who were guests to the workshop could relate to their personal 
experience and, hopefully, engage with others during the workshop − and after it − to start 
thinking of creative ways to increase their power of action. The idea was to create a space in 
which the group could expand their conatus as quoted by Spinoza (2003, III, Prop. VII), that 
is, the potential to improve and nurture one’s existence. 
 
3. Play as an intervention resource   
 
In this section of the paper, we are going to describe the workshop as well as present and 
discuss some of the activities included, to exemplify the theoretical and practical concepts of 
collaboration and play. Figure 1 brings the poster that was used on the GPB website to 
promote the workshop in June, 2020.  
 
Figure 1 − Workshop poster on the GPB website. 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3519
 
 
The poster (Figure 1) gives the names of the three professors that planned the workshop and 
acted as facilitators, during its course, as well as the names of the professionals who were 
invited by them to participate as guests. In total, eight professionals attended it. They were in 
Brazil, the USA, and Ireland at that time. One of these professionals was Kenyan, three were 
Brazilians living abroad, and four were Brazilians from different regions of the country. 
Given the international character of the workshop, which was open to whoever subscribed via 
the GPB website, English was the chosen language for interaction. Some of the activities in 
the workshop are presented and discussed in the sections that follow. 
 
Find someone who… 
 
The first activity was called Find someone who. It aimed at having participants find out who 
the guests were and also introduce themselves by asking questions to get to know one another. 
The objective of this activity was to highlight that using language is more than finding 
specific information. It allows us to start a conversation with a stranger, establish some kind 
of connection − by means of eye contact and facial expressions − and learn to select words 
that help us get to know people better, and thus feel more comfortable near them. To that end, 
facilitators divided participants in three breakout rooms and provided them with a table of the 
job titles, cities, and countries of the guests (see Figure 2). After receiving this information, 
the participants improvised questions to try and guess who was in their breakout room before 
the time set for that activity was up.  
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3519
 
Figure 2 − Guests’ list shared in the workshop. 
 
Ph.D. in Biomedical 
Engineering and Director 
at Fatec Mogi das Cruzes 
- SP/Brazil 
Civil Engineer - 
Drogheda/Ireland 
Master's Degree student 
in Space Technologies at 
INPE - São José dos 
Campos/Brazil 
Ph.D. Assistant Professor 
at the University of 
Nebraska at Omaha - 
Omaha/USA 
International Student - 
New York/USA 
 
Certified Medical 
Assistant - Orlando/USA 
Master's Degree student 
in Genetics and 
Molecular Biology - 
Campinas/Brazil 
Social Media Analyst - 
SP/Brazil 
 
 
 
When participants came back to the general room, they talked about who the guests they had 
met were and provided further information they found out. During this part of the workshop 
the facilitators also asked some guests to share their answer to the question: Global 
collaboration: what can young professionals do? so that they could broaden the discussion of 
ways to create reality through multiple forms of saying, feeling, acting, and being in the 
world.  
 
The collaborative perspective (Magalhães & Fidalgo, 2019) of the workshop highlighted its 
virtual nature, i.e., an online meeting. As in meetings of this kind, participants need to deal 
with certain constraints to play, such as managing time, negotiating rules to reach the goal of 
the activity, listening carefully to others, sharing, and asking for information, they have to 
come up with strategies beyond the English language5 to interact. This happened first in the 
breakout room and then in the general room. This first activity worked as an icebreaker and 
was important because it set the scene to what was coming next in that play and talk session, 
that is, the sharing of information about oneself. Also, it helped participants realize meaning-
making through the efforts the whole group put into the activity. 
 
 
5 By saying “beyond the English language” we refer to the different semiotic resources used to produce and 
convey meaning such as gestures, facial expressions, and tone of voice. They are intentionally brought to 
interaction settings according to language users’ objectives as well as to some cultural, historical, and social 
agreements.  
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3519
In that direction, Marx (1980, XVI, p. 378), when explaining the importance of collective 
work, affirms that the worker gets rid of the “limits of their individuality and develops the 
capacity of their species”. The social contact in a specific activity pushes participants to move 
toward a common goal, which enhances their capability of acting and achieving better results 
than they would, should group members act individually (Spinoza, 2003).   
 
The vygotskian perspective, which underlines the action of the other in the action of oneself, 
was also present in this activity, as this perspective highlights collaboration as a space for the 
co-construction of knowledge. It is important to mention that there is no hierarchy in the roles 
played (Magalhães & Fidalgo, 2019), which tends to boost stronger interdependence and 
shared responsibility in the search for a common goal, a sine qua non condition for a 
successful collaborative work. 
 
What’s true about me... 
 
In the second activity, called What’s true about me, facilitators wanted all the participants − 
not only the guests − to have a chance to share information about themselves. To this end, all 
participants were instructed to cover their cameras and listen to a general fact about one of 
them, such as What’s true about me is that I like to wake up late. Those to whom the 
information was true had to uncover their cameras, so they would be able to see who shared 
something in common with them. After a few rounds, participants felt more confident to 
connect to one another through their differences and similarities.  
 
At first sight, this activity might seem too simple and just a pastime, but it actually set the 
scene for participants to get connected to everyone through their tastes and habits, giving 
them the opportunity to realize how diversity is present everywhere and how people might 
feel about it. In other words, it helped participants see that despite the disagreements that may 
arise, we have some common ground as human beings and, as such, a longing for respect. In 
this perspective, play becomes this powerful revolutionary activity (Newman & Holzman, 
2002), in which participants reflect about themselves and others in their process of becoming 
(Liberali, 2019). 
 
More specifically, this activity gave participants a chance to feel free to share whatever 
personal fact they wanted with the group and react to other people’s facts by uncovering their 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3519
camera. Such gesture, or lack of it, clearly stated: “I’m like you”, “I feel you” or “That’s not 
me”, “I don’t do that”. In this manner, participants were exposed to different personal traits 
and expressed how they were affected and how those feelings were part of their subjectivity, 
while sharing that with others (Sawaia, 2018). 
 
 
Questions and answers 
 
The third activity involved facilitators inviting participants to ask further questions to anyone 
they were curious about or to simply comment on any aspect addressed during the workshop. 
Guests could also expand their answers to how they were trying to collaborate to others 
during the pandemic, in their professional setting. Excerpt 1 is a guest testimonial that 
illustrates the kind of talk participants had in the session: 
 
Excerpt 1: 
 
“We’ve been teaching online, but many of my students are struggling because they lost their 
jobs, so they don’t have money, they’re being evicted from apartments, so they don’t have 
some place to live, they’re going hungry, so I’m teaching, but I’m also helping my students 
find food, find somewhere to live, to find how to apply for unemployment benefits, so that they 
have a little bit of money. So, it’s been really hard here… and specifically because… there’s a 
big difference between the white people and everybody who’s not white and so my students of 
color, my black students, my brown students are also suffering more than my white students, 
which is very upsetting. So, just being very busy trying to help my students. I think of them as 
my family, so it’s hard to rest when my family is suffering like that.” 
 
Following the two previous play activities, this testimonial seems to have brought light to real 
problems participants were facing. It somehow encouraged them to share experiences and 
react to all those stories and feelings that were being exposed. The careful listening, reactions 
of shock, support, and relief seen on the faces on the screen, during each of the testimonials, 
clearly showed how affected by them participants were.  
 
The testimonial in Excerpt 1 seemed to have a particularly strong impact on all participants 
because the world had recently watched demonstrations carried out by the Black Lives Matter 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3519
movement6 in the USA. At the same time in Brazil, people were affected by the news of the 
death of Miguel7, a five-year old black kid, who had been left alone by his mother’s employer 
before falling nine floors in a luxury seaside apartment. It was clear that this testimonial (see 
Excerpt 1) caught participants’ attention as they nodded in agreement and displayed their 
surprised face while carefully watching or listening to each testimonial that was voluntarily 
shared in the group.  
 
For college students and young professionals taking part in the workshop, that moment of 
conversation affected them somehow because they could relate to their own ups and downs 
while studying online, how the job market was dealing with the crisis in their area, and also 
how they were personally dealing with all those demands. Such reactions bring to mind the 
concept of affectus, in a spinozian perspective, that is, affectus is responsible for the 
transformation of the self through composing “joyful encounters with bodies” (Spinoza, 
2003). Excerpts 2 and 3 are part of two other testimonials that show further how much 
participants felt at ease to share experiences during the workshop. 
 
Excerpt 2: 
 
“Life here changed a lot since March. I don’t feel totally comfortable… going out and 
everything. We had such a hard time in New York, but I guess we could handle the situation a 
little bit better. We took it seriously, and we could flat the curve… My English classes were 
online like everywhere. It was a little bit difficult because I like the interaction with teachers 
and friends at classroom, I like to talk, and it was a little bit lonely because I couldn’t talk to 
anyone, but I didn’t have another choice. But life is getting back on track little by little, you 
know… and things will be better. I hope.” 
 
Excerpt 3: 
 
“I started working with the coronavirus, doing research to find treatment for people. So, I 
have worked with chloroquine and ivermectin, which are two very famous drugs here in 
 
6 For further information: https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/07/03/us/george-floyd-protests-crowd-
size.html 
 
7 For further information: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/jun/12/brazil-black-boy-fall-death-racism 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3519
Brazil, but they didn’t work, so don’t take chloroquine and ivermectin! Also, we’re trying to 
find drugs that really work for that. It’s very hard, you know, because we need to do the 
research for a long time to see if it works or not. So, that’s it. I’m in the front line.” 
 
In Spinoza's Ethics, affectus are seen as the continuous variation of the power of acting, 
(Spinoza, 2003, III, Def. 3), generated by the affectio or modifications suffered in the body, 
whose effects are translated by affectus. Depending on the composition of relations among 
bodies, the affectus can be active, when it expresses the passage to a greater perfection (joy), 
or passive, when it expresses the opposite movement (sadness). The increase or the decrease 
in a person's power of acting (to be and act) - conatus - comes from encounters. Thus, 
encounters may broaden or reduce a person’s power of acting. 
 
The power of human action is grounded in encounters because it is related to the infinite 
possibilities of composition between the affectus. In order words, it is related to the potential 
to affect and be affected. In this sense, Sawaia (2009) explains that affectus is responsible for 
the union of powers in conceiving a single body and a single mind. This joining of power 
constitutes the collective political subject and the multitude, originated from people’s desire 
to ensure better conditions for their existence towards a common objective that can improve 
the social benefit of the collectivity (Spinoza, 2017).  
 
The change I want to see is…  
 
The last activity in the workshop that will be described and discussed in this paper was named 
The change I want to see is. It was conducted after some questions, answers, and testimonials 
were shared in the group. During this activity, participants were invited to write, in the chat, 
the change they hoped for. This would be their final remark in the workshop. The idea was to 
explore their creativity using everything that was shared in the workshop. They were 
encouraged to express what they were looking forward to achieving personally or to seeing 
change in the world. They had a few minutes to reflect upon what they would say and, all 
together, entered their thoughts in the chat. All participants could see one another’s posts and 
these were read out loud by one of the facilitators. Excerpt 4 illustrates some of the posts. 
 
Excerpt 4: 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3519
“The change I want to see is… 
...respect and love. 
...no hate speeches. 
...respect for science. 
...respect for black lives and LGBTQI+ people. 
...the increase of interdisciplinary work that contributes to people in general. 
...respect for different cultures. 
...improvement for housing systems.” 
 
In terms of how participants wished reality was different, Excerpt 4 highlights some of the 
issues discussed during the workshop. Some of them were not even part of their immediate 
reality, but while participants were listening to them, they all were affected so that global 
solidarity and responsibility were shared, considering their expressions on the screen. After 
all, the whole world was living the pandemic at the same time and if they had not experienced 
those situations, they might have witnessed similar cases or at least heard of them. 
 
The activities described above exemplify how GPB’s participants integrate play to a 
revolutionary cause aligned with the idea of a moving world in which they, when being 
affected and affecting others, can dialectically and collaboratively increase their powers of 
action (conatus) and develop agency. Motivated by mutual support and a more equitable 
perspective towards society, an activist agency can be created. According to Stetsenko (2017), 
confronting the inequality crisis by expanding what is predicted in the status quo, can guide 
people towards co-creating history, and society simultaneously to their own transforming 
agencies. 
 
Liberali (2020) points out that constructing social change is mandatory for an effective 
transformation of the unfair contradictions that seem to be expanding in our reality. What 
participants experienced in the workshop described here is meant to help them engage in more 
politically and ethically driven activities. The inevitability of such engagement demands 
taking a critical stance towards values and whatever it is one aspires to do. The process of 
self-development takes place as the world changes and both events affect one another. As 
such, there is an urgent need for the building of agency for social transformation beyond the 
everyday reality that tends to keep people apart. 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3519
4. Final remarks and way forward 
 
In response to the global pandemic, GPB can be understood as an international community 
whose collaborative bias, in spinozian language, has affected partners in different areas and 
routines, striving to encourage transformative actions worldwide. This movement entails the 
understanding that it is crucial to overcome oppressive situations in favor of the common 
good. This means exploring possibilities to face reality and actually doing something about it. 
This activist stance recognizes that social change is urgent and dependent on political and 
ethical engagement, which criticality becomes the key to justice, more equitable living 
conditions, and well-being globally. 
 
Within this context, this paper presented an initiative carried out by the GPB community, 
which was an online play and talk workshop offered as one of the monthly events of the 
group. It discussed and exemplified the theoretical and practical concepts of collaboration and 
play that are two of the fundamental concepts to this international group. The workshop 
entitled Global collaboration: what can young professionals do?, seems to align these two 
concepts in its organization plan and in the workshop itself, highlighting the intent to 
transform realities brought about by the covid-19 pandemic, which, in turn, seemed to inflame 
other major social problems. 
 
Participants from different professional areas and backgrounds got together to play and talk 
about their lives during the crisis and their desire for better days. The sequence of activities in 
the workshop challenged participants, who were studying English in college, to use such 
language in a critical perspective. That means to understand real life situations and share their 
points of view based on their own and other people’s experiences. The English language was 
one of the resources in this multimodal context, in which facial expressions, laugh, gestures, 
sounds, and written texts were all used to establish a connection among participants. 
 
Such connection was also enabled by play, which creates a collaborative space for 
participants to overcome immediate obstacles in terms of communication and, more 
importantly, refer to broader contexts and think of viable possibilities for their existence. 
Through play, the overcoming of obstacles can be sustained in a collective experience that 
involves increasing everybody’s potential towards social justice. Play becomes an ongoing 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3519
reflexive and practical exercise to deal with otherness, its conflicts, and our inherent impulse 
to move on, which are constant and vital in human development. 
 
By facing the world the pandemic created, the GPB community stands up for global 
collaboration in its multiple facets. The workshops, as the one focused here, try to engage 
participants in social transformation through affectus (Spinoza, 2017) generated in play and 
talk sessions. They seek to conceive new realities by means of discussion as well as a range of 
creative means, such as imagination, improvisation, and performance. It is a movement to 
fight against those forces that push back the possibility of coexistence, which is, after all, the 
combination of everything that constitutes the self and what enables us to be. 
 
In Freire’s perspective (1970), the viable unheard of can be traced in some active movements 
in communities, for example, as the GPB and in other programs that expand those principles 
to local needs such as Brincadas, the way that LACE Research Group ressignified GPB’s 
principles in the Brazilian context. This aspect also exposes the multidisciplinary vein of AL, 
which has been the theoretical and methodological framework for LACE over the years. It is 
crucial for this group to align language research to social engagement as a part of the 
continuous learning process everyone’s in, but also as a provocative and responsive action 
towards individual and collective transformation. 
 
Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank Ulysses Diegues, a Brigadier and a member of Brincadas in Brazil, 
for being one of the facilitators in the workshop and giving us feedback in the first draft of 
this paper. We would also like to thank Alexandre Borin, Bruno Marques Panccioni, Caio 
Gustavo Cruz, Danielle Fuga, Danubia Sales de Oliveira, Ferial Pearson, Maik Lima da Silva 
and Vitor Fagundes for accepting our invitation as guests in the workshop and making it 
possible. We extend our gratitude to all the participants who decided to play and talk with us 
and CAPES for financial support in the research developed by the first author of this paper, 
according to the Ethical Appreciation Certificate number 4.341.663. 
Conflict of interests 
 
( X ) The authors declare they have no conflict of interest. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3519
 
 
Credit Author Statement 
We, José Carlos Barbosa Lopes, Daniela Vendramini-Zanella, and Valdite Pereira Fuga, 
hereby declare that we do not have any potential conflict of interest in this study. We have all 
participated in the study conceptualization, methodology, data analysis, and editing. All 
authors approve the final version of the manuscript and are responsible for all aspects, 
including the guarantee of its veracity and integrity. 
 
References 
 
Freire, P. (1970). Pedagogia do oprimido. 26ª ed. Paz e Terra. 
 
Holzman, L. (2009). Vygotsky at work and play. Routledge.  
 
Krenak, A. (2020). Ideias para adiar o fim do mundo. 2ª ed. Companhia das Letras. 
 
Liberali, F. (2019). Transforming Urban Education in São Paulo: Insights into a Critical-
Collaborative School Project. DELTA: Documentação de Estudos em Lingüística Teórica e 
Aplicada, 35(3), 1-26. https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460X2019350302.  
 
Liberali, F. (2020). Building Agency for Social Change. In A. Tanzi Neto, F. Liberali, & M. 
Dafermos (Eds.). Revisiting Vygotsky for social change: bringing together theory and 
Practice (pp 63-85). Series: (Post)critical global studies; vol. 2. Peter Lang. 
 
Magalhães, M.C.M. (2009). O método para Vygotsky: a Zona de Desenvolvimento Proximal 
como zona de colaboração e criticidade criativas (pp 53-78). In R. H. Schettini, M.C. 
Damianovic, M.M. Hawi, & P.T.C. Szundy (Eds.) Vygotsky: uma revisita no início do século 
XXI. Andross. 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3519
Magalhães, M.C.C., & Fidalgo, S.S. (2019). Reviewing Critical Research Methodologies for 
Teacher Education in Applied Linguistics. DELTA: Documentação de Estudos em Lingüística 
Teórica e Aplicada, 35(3), 1-19. http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/1678-460X2019350301  
 
Marx, K.  (1890/1980) O Capital: crítica da economia política. Tradução: Reginaldo Sant’ 
Anna. Civilização Brasileira, S.A. 
 
Moita Lopes, L.P. (Ed.) (2006). Por uma Linguística Aplicada Indisciplinar. Parábola 
Editorial. 
 
Newman, F., & Holzman, L.  (2002). Lev Vygotsky: Revolutionary scientist. Routledge. 
 
Sawaia, B. B.  (2009). Psicologia e desigualdade social: uma reflexão sobre liberdade e 
transformação social. Psicologia & Sociedade, 21(3), 364-372. 
https://doi.org/10.1590/S0102-71822009000300010 
 
Sawaia, B. B (2018). Afeto e comum: categorias centrais em diferentes contextos. In B.B. 
Sawaia, R. Albuquerque, & F. R. Busarello. Afeto & Comum: reflexões sobre a práxis 
psicossocial (pp. 29 – 36). Editora da Universidade Federal do Amazonas.  
 
Spinoza, B. (2003). The Ethics. Translated from Latin by R.H.M. Elwes. 
https://www.gutenberg.org/files/3800/3800-h/3800-h.htm (accessed 19 December, 2020). 
 
Spinoza, B. (2017). Tratado político. Tradução Diogo Pires Aurélio. Editora Martins Fontes. 
 
Stetsenko, A. (2017). The transformative mind: Expanding Vygotsky´s approach to 
development and education. Cambridge University Press. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9780511843044 
 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1934/2001). A Construção do pensamento e da linguagem. Tradução: Paulo 
Bezerra. Martins Fontes.  
 
Vygotsky, L. S (1934/2004). Psicologia pedagógica. Tradução: Paulo Bezerra. Martins 
Fontes. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3519
This preprint was submitted under the following conditions: 
The authors declare that they are aware that they are solely responsible for the content of the preprint and
that the deposit in SciELO Preprints does not mean any commitment on the part of SciELO, except its
preservation and dissemination.
The authors declare that the necessary Terms of Free and Informed Consent of participants or patients in
the research were obtained and are described in the manuscript, when applicable.
The authors declare that the preparation of the manuscript followed the ethical norms of scientific
communication.
The authors declare that the data, applications, and other content underlying the manuscript are
referenced.
The deposited manuscript is in PDF format.
The authors declare that the research that originated the manuscript followed good ethical practices and
that the necessary approvals from research ethics committees, when applicable, are described in the
manuscript.
The authors declare that once a manuscript is posted on the SciELO Preprints server, it can only be taken
down on request to the SciELO Preprints server Editorial Secretariat, who will post a retraction notice in its
place.
The authors agree that the approved manuscript will be made available under a Creative Commons CC-BY
license.
The submitting author declares that the contributions of all authors and conflict of interest statement are
included explicitly and in specific sections of the manuscript.
The authors declare that the manuscript was not deposited and/or previously made available on another
preprint server or published by a journal.
If the manuscript is being reviewed or being prepared for publishing but not yet published by a journal, the
authors declare that they have received authorization from the journal to make this deposit.
The submitting author declares that all authors of the manuscript agree with the submission to SciELO
Preprints.
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
