Commonly, dental care is characterized by contact with patients, especially their 
upper airways. Due to the advance of COVID-19, the routine of dental offices was 
enormously affected and elective services were temporarily suspended, being performed 
only emergence and urgency procedures. As saliva is a potential transmission vehicle for 
SARS-CoV-2,1,2 dentists have resorted to alternative solutions to avoid aerosol 
production by high-rotating equipment and minimize the impact caused by the pandemic.  

For that reason, teledentistry, which is an information and communication resource 
with the potential to improve the quality of dental health care has conquered space by 
both dental professionals and patients. It enables oral care and health attention in remote 
areas, as well as it allows professionals to identify the high risk groups and provide 
prompt service when necessary, consequently, reducing the waiting lists.3 

In emerging countries like Brazil, teledentistry represents an alternative to offer 
good quality telemonitoring, especially for people most in need at an affordable cost. This 
tool has been imminently used in public health services, with good experiences of 
telemedicine programs in primary care around the world, including Brazil with 
Telehealth, an initiative of the Ministry of Health of Brazil that provides Teleducation 
actions. In this scenario, specific services were created to support the study of oral 
lesions.4 

This year, the Brazilian Federal Council of Dentistry published the resolution nº 
226 addressing the remote dental practice. Considering the Law 5081/66, which regulates 
the exercise of dentistry, the resolution determines the prohibition of technologies-
mediated dental consultations for diagnosis, prescription, and treatment plan elaboration. 
Regarding the dentist-patient relationship, the remote care and telemonitoring of patients 
are only admitted when patients undergoing treatment are unable to return to the office, 
or a teleorientation carried out by the clinician to decide the best time to perform face-to-
face assistance.5 

During the pandemic, with distance measures ruling, and imminent risk of 
contamination by SARS-CoV-2, patients have shown constant apprehension regarding 
their safety and the quality of dental service. Additionally, most of our patients depend 
exclusively on public health services, such as oral oncologic attention, periodontal care, 
oral hygiene, and routine appointments. For this group of patients, continuous 
appointments are vital. Therefore, some measures such as the inclusion of voice and 
video calls, in the interval between face-to-face consultations, may represent an ideal 
temporary solution to avoid aggravations and decompensations of the patients' health 
status, ensuring frequent remote monitorization at a distance.3    

Carrard et al. (2017)7 highlight that the use of WhatsApp mobile application by oral 
medicine patients presented expressive success rates. In Greece, Georgakopoulou (2020)5 
achieved good results with telehealth in her private dental clinic, even bringing new 
patients. Machado et al. (2020)8 reinforce the usefulness of mobile applications for 
telemonitoring patients. 

In conclusion, telecommunications strategies are suitable for scenarios such as the 
one we are currently facing. Furthermore, it is believed that the telemonitoring tool for 
dentists and patients will become popular over time, and advances in this area will likely 
consolidate this resource, taking it to the daily routine of dental professionals. 
