BACKGROUND: In March 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared the 
COVID-19 outbreak a pandemic. In Brazil, the high rate of dissemination made it 
necessary to adopt restrictive measures nationwide with the discussion regarding the 
resumption of economic activities starting in April. In mid-December the country had 
6,970,034 cases diagnosed and 182,799 deaths from COVID-19.  

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the content and characteristics of official documents, which 
guided the period of transition and resumption of economic activities in Brazil based on 
health indicators. METHODS: This is a documental research, carried out between May 
and July 2020, using official websites and publications from the state governments of the 
27 federative units in Brazil as sources. In the study, only documents that used 
epidemiological and health indicators were included as determining criteria for decision 
making in relation to the easing, permanence or regression of social isolation measures 
adopted during the COVID-19 pandemic.  

FINDINGS: Plans, decrees and technical notes were identified for 18 Brazilian federal 
units. In most documents, the scientific team was made up exclusively of technicians (n 
= 10). The number of indicators found ranged from 2 to 11, being stratified into 5 
categories: frequency and distribution of the disease; social and collective adherence; 
installed capacity or service profile; productive potential; and availability of supplies.  

MAIN CONCLUSIONS: Knowing governmental strategies, adopted in the easing of 
restrictive measures, in the face of the coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) pandemic based on 
indicators and with the possibility of comparison between different federative units, 
provides subsidies for understanding the outcome of the disease by place of occurrence, 
allowing the construction of a panorama pathology in the country. The appropriation of 
the findings of this study by Brazil and other countries also serves as an instrument for 
reflection and planning of policies adopted during the COVID-19 pandemic. 

In January 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared the spread of 
SARS-CoV-2 as a global public health problem and, two months later, announced the 
pandemic state.(1,2) These actions considered the new coronavirus's pathogenicity, 
virulence, and the unavailability of effective treatment.(3-5) In this context, governmental 
measures to mitigate transmission and lethality, which are fundamental to contain the 
epidemic, have a substantial global impact, but their scope is still uncertain.(6) 

In Brazil, due to the high rate and speed of contamination, it was necessary to 
adopt restrictive measures to the public and private sectors throughout the country, with 
maintenance only of essential activities and adherence to public health recommendations 
and social distancing from WHO.(7) These measures showed that tackling the COVID-19 
pandemic encompasses health aspects and social, political, and economic elements.(8) In 
this context, the articulated and coordinated action between Brazilian federative units 
(FU) - states and the Federal District, in compliance with the guidelines of competent 
bodies and foreign experiences, are of paramount importance, as slow or ineffective 
government responses burden public health and can cost thousands of human lives. 

Therefore, in February, it became urgent to draw up contingency plans to assist 
the respective governments in tackling COVID-19 within the scope of the Unified Health 
System (SUS in Portuguese),(9) a publicly funded national security body. Thus, the 
Ministry of Health's actions, aimed at mitigating the pandemic, ranged from 
epidemiological surveillance to highly complex assistance, with activities ranging from 
the imminent arrival of SARS-CoV-2 in Brazil to the current scenario characterized by 
the easing of restrictive measures and social isolation. (10,11) 

As of April, the discussion on the gradual resumption of economic activities was 
strengthened by elaborating the first state plans for easing restrictions in Brazil, with 
implementation beginning in May, in at least one state, as reported by the Brazilian media 
and published in the official bulletins.(12) 

However, the absence of a minimum national guideline for the economic 
reopening offered scope for the appearance of numerous discrepancies between the 
different recovery plans presented by each federative unit concerning the quantity and 
quality of the indicators used, the metrics adopted, and the transparency and reliability of 
the selected sources. The scenario above, associated with the scarcity of scientific 
literature on the analysis of policies for easing restrictions, motivated the search process 
and subsequent analysis of the totality of economic recovery plans, allowing the 
discussion about the level of objectivity and parameterization that subsidized the 
decisions of government agencies for the relaxation of social isolation measures in each 
state. 

Therefore, this study's objective was to analyze the strategies of the Brazilian 
federative units' governments, based on the indicators adopted in the normative bases, 
which guided the resumption of activities during the COVID-19 pandemic. It is possible 
to offer a scientific basis to public managers about the complex decision-making process 
involving the relaxation of social isolation measures. 

This documentary research was carried out between May and July 2020. An active 
search was conducted on electronic websites (official journals and government' 
webpages) of Brazilian federative units (FU) to identify official publications related to 
the normative acts that guided resuming activities during the COVID-19 pandemic.  

A structured and standardized script was used for data collection, created using 
Microsoft Office Excel® software version 16.0, and made available for cloud computing. 
The collection was preceded by a training aiming at calibrating the development of the 
active search. After the data extraction, a double-check was applied by one of the authors 
who had his records checked by a second author. 

A pilot study was carried out in which the researchers tested the script and the 
search strategy. Three teachers and six students from the Medicine and Nursing courses 
at the Federal University of Piauí (UFPI) conducted the data collection after theoretical-
conceptual and methodological incorporation provided through weekly research 
meetings. 

The sample included documents that met, simultaneously, all the following 
inclusion criteria: structured content based on epidemiological and health indicators as 
defined by WHO,(13) legal validity in the period in which the data collection occurred, 
official character attributed to the state level of government, presenting a definition of the 
theoretical-conceptual and methodological framework for the economic reopening during 
the pandemic, presenting a proposal of economic reopening agenda, and availability in 
the public domain. Documents were excluded based on the following exclusion criteria: 
unavailable full texts and unofficial sources. 

The data analysis was performed in the following steps: 1) pre-reading, to 
assimilate the general configuration of the documents and verify compliance with the 
eligibility criteria; 2) selective reading, to identify the type of document, the document 
creation team and the adoption of epidemiological and health indicators; 3) 
categorization, in which the indicators were grouped and classified by qualitative 
similarity; and 4) descriptive and critical analysis of the data. 

The general criteria investigated were type of document (reopening plan, technical 
norm or decree), document creation team (technicians, researchers, or teachers), and 
presence and quantity of indicators defined in the norms. The specific elements 
corresponded to the source's details, type of indicator (quantitative or qualitative), 
calculation basis, and risk classification parameters. 

Regarding the records that regulate the process of economic reopening, among the 
27 federative units, only 18 formalized reopening documents based on epidemiological 
and health indicators. The states of the Federal District, Goiás, Paraná, Roraima, and 
Tocantins, have not formalized official plans to resume economic activities. Although 
four other states (Bahia, Pernambuco, Amapá, and Maranhão) have government plans to 
make social isolation flexible, they were not included in this analysis due to municipal 
scope and absence of well-defined indicators. 

The documents formulated in the state of Bahia were valid only at the municipal 
level. Given the large number of cities and the fragmentation and incoordination of 
actions observed, it appears that plans of municipal scope are inadequate to manage public 
health epidemics.(14) Amapá, Maranhão, and Pernambuco did not have their documents 
analyzed due to the absence of clear and formalized indicators to guide the decision-
making process. 

In the sample (n = 18), reopening plans, decrees, and technical notes were 
identified (Table 1). The states of Amazonas, Ceará, Espírito Santo, Minas Gerais, Piauí, 
Rio de Janeiro, and Sergipe presented health metrics for economic reopening in official 
reopening documents. The states of Acre, Pará, Paraíba, Rondônia, Rio Grande do Sul, 
and São Paulo presented the indicators for monitoring the epidemic both in plans for 
reopening and in decrees and technical notes. The states of Alagoas, Mato Grosso, Mato 
Grosso do Sul, Rio Grande do Norte, and Santa Catarina formalized monitoring indicators 
only through decrees and technical notes. The other states (Amapá, Bahia, Distrito 
Federal, Goiás, Maranhão, Pernambuco, Paraná, Roraima, and Tocantins) formulated 
documents that did not meet the study's inclusion criteria. 

Regarding the document creation teams, of the 18 states whose normatives were 
analyzed, eight (Alagoas, Amapá, Ceará, Mato Grosso, Rio Grande do Norte, Rondônia, 
Santa Catarina, and Sergipe) did not explain who they were and their respective 
competencies (Table 2). The documents from Piauí, Espírito Santo, and Pará clarified the 
multiple configuration of the document creation teams, being formed by technicians and 
researchers/teachers in the first two (Piauí and Espírito Santo), and by technicians, 
researchers/teachers, and community members in the last state (Pará). Finally, seven 
states (Acre, Mato Grosso do Sul, Minas Gerais, Paraíba, Rio de Janeiro, Rio Grande do 
Sul, São Paulo) presented documents created by a technical team formed by employees 
of state health departments. 

The indicators presented in the study's documentary data base were stratified into 
simple and composite, the latter being defined as the aggregation of two or more simple 
indicators.(42) Among the normative bases studied, eight adopted composite indicators: 
Espírito Santo, Pará, Piauí, Rio Grande do Sul and São Paulo, which used two indicators; 
Alagoas and Acre, with three; and Santa Catarina, with four. The most recurrent 
compound criteria were related to the disease's spread and the ability to meet the state 
health system. 

Most indicators, however, were used isolately, not linked to the structuring of 
compound criteria. Furthermore, most documents (83.33%) adopted up to seven simple 
indicators for decision making. According to the number of simple indicators in Table 3, 
the federative units were grouped by class. 

In this study, the indicators were further distributed into five major categories, 
according to the following characteristics: disease's frequency and distribution; social and 
collective adherence; capacity installed/assistance profile; productive potential; and 
availability of inputs. The groups were presented and described in Figure 1, designated 
with geometric symbols. The figure reveals the territorial distribution of these parameters 
based on the presence of health indicators in the normative basis and on the categories 
surveyed. A detailed description of each federation unit's indicators is presented in 
Supplementary Table 1. 

In the context of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, policies of social isolation and restriction 
of activities were established in a disorderly manner, with no guidelines on the level of rigidity 
of the measures according to the epidemiological situation and, mainly, without any regulations 
on future returns activities and relaxation of isolation measures.  

The lack of a coordinated strategic definition at the national level is severe because 
easing measures is even more complicated than implementing.(43) Public managers are faced 
with the challenge of establishing plans to reopen the economic sectors, ensure the maintenance 
of contingency behaviors for virus transmission, and articulate the agreed adhesion among the 
population, executives, and politicians.  

The strategy adopted in policies to fight infection by SARS-CoV-2 between state and 
federal governments in Brazil has been conflicting, making it difficult for a significant portion 
of society to adhere to WHO recommendations (hygiene and respiratory etiquette, social 
distancing, social isolation, and quarantine), in addition to special restrictive measures.(44,45) The 
Brazilian Supreme Court's intervention was essential in ratifying the autonomy of states and 
municipalities in decision-making and overcoming it with some controversial measures 
adopted by the federal government.(46-48) 

Thus, in the absence of a national policy capable of coordinating states and 
municipalities' actions, as of April, most federative units used their endorsed autonomy to 
develop structured plans for resuming economic activities.(14) Nevertheless, it occurred in a 
decentralized and disintegrated manner, culminating in the official publication of plans, 
decrees, ordinances, and technical norms containing extremely varied characteristics. 

As identified in this study, of the 27 Brazilian federative units, only 18 presented plans 
to resume economic activities based on epidemiological and health indicators. This fact leads 
to questioning the types of criteria used by the nine federative units, which did not structure 
formal reopening strategies or did so, but at the municipal level, or without the adoption of 
objective indicators. 

The formalization of guidelines, in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, is a vital 
instrument to support the work of public managers, as well as an aid to the administration of 
the expectations of the population,(14) which in turn must appropriate the criteria used by 
governments to guide decisions on economic and social sectors, as they directly impact the 
individuals' quality of life. 

Besides, the presence of official plan adopted with transparency, widely disseminated 
to society, and endowed with clear, well-defined and easily understood criteria is essential to 
reduce the influence of groups and sectors that may interfere with government decisions.(14) 
Therefore, the adoption of objective indicators is fundamental for the success of government 
strategies and, mainly, for them to be executed fairly and democratically, based on scientific 
literature and aiming, above all, for the benefit of the population.  

In the 18 states that structure economic recovery strategies, epidemiological and health 
indicators were used as determining parameters of flexibility, permanence, or return to the 
previous phase of reopening the economy. Most of the indicators adopted were related to the 
frequency and distribution of the disease and the installed capacity or assistance profile of the 
health system, which shows partial compliance with WHO's criteria to guide public policies 
for the relaxation of measures.(49) 

Although it meets some of the criteria required by WHO 49, most Brazilian states did 
not present concrete policies to screen, monitor, and, mainly, optimized the testing of suspected 
cases. Only Pará, Mato Grosso do Sul, and Santa Catarina presented indicators related to the 
mentioned categories, but still, in a fragile way, as only Pará described the metric used to 
calculate the indicator. This is a critical finding as, without prioritization by the public tracking 
system, the reopening plans operate in a scenario that may not match the state's epidemiological 
reality. 

Another common problem was reduced transparency concerning the document 
development teams. Only ten plans contained a description of the authors' professional 
activities with a remarkable predominance of technicians. The participation of researchers and 
teachers in the preparation of the documents was minimal or not reported, except for the states 
of Espírito Santo(16) and Piauí(19). A mentions of community involvement was found only in 
Pará. Therefore, the precariousness of the articulations policies carried out for the structuring 
of plans can generate significant difficulty in raising awareness and engaging the population, 
which indicates the existence of distancing from the scientific community in the process of 
developing public policies. 

The number of simple indicators adopted in each state was significantly variable (2 to 
11) but should not be used to analyze state plans' effectiveness in isolation. It was possible to 
identify detailed and structured plans with very different amounts of indicators, such as São 
Paulo and Rio Grande do Sul with, respectively, 5 and 11 indicators. In addition to government 
measures that are not formalized in documents but that interfere in the decision-making 
process, some components of the plans reflect more effective policies in tackling the pandemic, 
such as: inclusion of parameters to monitor the policies for testing, defining and reassessing 
the cutoff points for the indicators, caution in defining the set of criteria necessary for the 
transition from flexibilization phases, in addition to the construction of a regionalized policy, 
which allows the management of resources and the adjustment of the rigor of the measures 
according to the epidemiological situation, in a micro and macro context. 

Finally, even if it is thorough, the analysis carried out in this study does not reach the 
internal management processes, the various measures to face the pandemic, and the co-
responsibility of other government spheres on the results. Therefore, the current analysis should 
not be used as a measure of governmental administrations' performance but as a guideline about 
the objectivity, clarity, and transparency of the recovery plans presented by each Brazilian 
federated unit analyzed. 

Given the data mentioned above and taking into account the objective of the study, it is 
possible to conclude that the normative basis of the Brazilian states showed variation in terms 
of configuration and characteristics as a result of the absence of an effective national policy in 
coordinating actions between the different Brazilian states. Because of the adoption of 
divergent policies between the different government levels, the plans formulated by the states, 
which disaggregated the process of relaxing restrictions, prevailed. 

The absence of a unified database, which brings together the strategies adopted in each 
state and allows comparisons to be made, makes public management difficult. A significant 
number of states have presented reopening plans with clear, documented, and communicated 
indicators to the population, especially concerning the spread of the virus and the health 
system's capacity. However, other vital parameters, mainly about testing and regionalization 
of measures, were little used. Given the deep need to plan the economic recovery, most of the 
plans remained below the adequate level, exposing the population and the public administrators 
to disorderly decisions that are being made without the necessary transparency to meet 
democratic principles. 
