Objective: The aim of this study is to estimate the incidence of COVID-19 in a vaccinated and an 
unvaccinated group of adolescents and describe their symptoms.  

Methods: In May 2021 a private indoor event for high school adolescents took place resulting in 
a superspreading event. As part of the study, an anonymous questionnaire was sent to all 
adolescents invited to the event and details about symptoms, previous COVID-19 infection, 
vaccination status and behavior during the event was assessed. Two groups were formed, one 
of vaccinated individuals and the other of unvaccinated individuals. A sample from a fully 
vaccinated symptomatic individual was sequenced. General characteristics for the studied groups 
are described using categorical and continuous data. The incidence of COVID-19 in each group 
was estimated by taking the total number of COVID-19 positive cases (numerator) divided by the 
total number of individuals (denominator) multiplied by 100. 

Results: A total of 41 out of the 164 adolescents (incidence 25%, 95%CI 18.6- 32.4) that attended 
the private indoor event developed COVID-19. A sample was sequenced from one of the 
symptomatic and fully vaccinated individuals with BNT162b2 (Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine) finding 
SARS-CoV-2 Delta (B.1.617.2) variant of concern. The incidence of COVID-19 in the 
unvaccinated was 35.1% (95%CI 25.5-45.6), and in the vaccinated 11.4% (95%CI 5.1-21.3). 
There were more unvaccinated than vaccinated teenagers that developed COVID-19 𝝌2= 12.6, 
(p=0.00). The crude Odds Ratio when comparing the unvaccinated vs the vaccinated was of 4.19, 
95%CI 1.79-9.8. Almost all (40 out of the 41) developed more than one COVID-19 symptom. The 
mean number of symptoms reported was 6 in both vaccinated and unvaccinated individuals. Both 
unvaccinated and vaccinated positive adolescents developed fatigue, runny nose, anosmia, 
fever, cough, and ageusia. None of the adolescents that reported a prior COVID-19 infection got 
reinfected during the event (N=47). At least two known positive individuals attended the event; all 
other attendees tested negative in a rapid antigen test performed 24 hours before the event. 
Attendees were there for 2 or more hours in the non-ventilated environment, without social 
distancing, without a face mask (87.8%) and socializing with high music volume. None of the 
COVID-19 positive adolescents, nor any of their close contacts who developed secondary 
infections required hospitalization nor died from COVID-19. 

Conclusion: The results of this study shows that unvaccinated susceptible adolescents have a 
higher incidence of COVID-19 than vaccinated adolescents. But once infected, both unvaccinated 
and vaccinated adolescents had similar symptoms including fatigue, runny nose, anosmia, fever, 
cough, and ageusia. Adolescents recovered from previous COVID-19 infections were not 
reinfected. The lack of infection-mitigating strategies resulted in a superspreading event. 

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the causative agent of COVID-
19 has infected over 200 million and killed over 4 million people worldwide by August 2021 
(Harvey et al., 2021). Since the start of the ongoing pandemic, multiple candidate vaccines have 
been developed, several of them highly effective and therefore, authorized under emergency use 
within a year of the first report of coronavirus disease 2019 (Polack et al., 2020).The World Health 
Organization reports that vaccination is the second best public health strategy to mitigate and 
control infectious diseases after access to clean water (World Health Organization, no date). In 
December 2020, countries started an intense vaccination program to first protect the most 
vulnerable population, mainly the elderly, and persons with increased exposure to the SARS-
CoV-2 virus due to high-risk occupations, health care workers and front-line workers (Russell and 
Greenwood, 2021).  

Previous studies have shown that adolescents are less prone to severe COVID-19, hospitalization 
and death due to COVID-19 compared to adults (CDC, 2021; Stein, 2021). Also, some studies 
report that COVID-19 positive adolescents have mild respiratory symptoms, namely fever, dry 
cough, and fatigue or are asymptomatic (Castagnoli et al., 2020). Less than 1% can develop multi 
systemic inflammatory syndrome (MIS-C) (Hoste, Van Paemel and Haerynck, 2021) and 5.1% 
can develop Long COVID (Mellis, 2021). 

The BNT62b2 (Pfizer/BioNTech) COVID-19 vaccine was the first to be authorized under 
emergency use for individuals over 16 years old on December 11 2020 (Office of the 
Commissioner, 2021). On March 31 2021, it was the first vaccine with published results of its 
phase 3 on adolescents 12-15 years of age, finding that it was well tolerated, safe, immunogenic 
and had 100% efficacy in preventing symptomatic COVID-19 (Frenck et al., 2021). However, 
there is not much information on the dynamic of COVID-19 in adolescents, both vaccinated and 
unvaccinated, under conditions that differ from those in an experimental trial.  

In April 2021, the Delta (B.1.617.2) variant was identified in India and classified on May 11 as 
variant of concern (VOC) due to its fast spread and potential immune escape (Singh et al., 2021). 
The more infectious Delta variant of concern increased the incidence of breakthrough infections 
in different countries and populations (Baral et al., 2021; Lopez Bernal et al., 2021). In fully 
vaccinated health workers, most breakthrough infections were reported as mild or asymptomatic 
(Linsenmeyer et al., 2021). Nevertheless, to date, information is scarce on the dynamics of 
COVID-19 in vaccinated and unvaccinated adolescents.   

The aim of this study is to estimate the incidence of COVID-19 in a vaccinated and an 
unvaccinated group of adolescents, and describe their symptoms. 

In May 2021, a private event for high school adolescents with ages between 15 and 19 years, 
took place in Mexico City. The event was held in a closed room with no ventilation. A rapid antigen 
test with confirmed negative results of COVID-19 was mandatory to attend the event and was 
performed 24 hours prior to the event. All of the vaccinated adolescents had been vaccinated in 
the United States, as vaccines were not available for adolescents in Mexico at that time. After the 
event, several cases of COVID-19 were reported. All attendees were requested to take a COVID-
19 test within a week of attending the event. One of the samples, from a symptomatic fully 
vaccinated person, was sequenced to determine the SARS-CoV-2 genetic variant.  

We sent a questionnaire to all the high school adolescents invited to the private event (N=199). 
Only those that attended the event were included in the study (N=164). Informed consent was 
requested at the start of the questionnaire. For those under 18 informed consent was asked from 
one of the parents based on guidelines from the WHO (World Health Organization, 2021). We 
emphasized that participation in the study was anonymous and voluntary, and we held an open 
virtual meeting with adolescents and their parents to share the objectives and methods of this 
study. The questionnaire included close-choice items and one open-ended question. We collected 
data on age, sex, prior COVID-19 infection, status of the COVID-19 rapid antigen test before the 
event, result of the COVID-19 test after the event, the use of face masks, the amount of time 
spent at the event, vaccination status, symptoms after the event, and people from their close 
contacts that developed COVID-19 after the event.  

General characteristics for the whole studied population are described using categorical and 
continuous data by frequency and percentage, and mean and standard deviation (SD), 
respectively. Two different cohorts were created: vaccinated and unvaccinated. Vaccinated were 
defined as individuals who had received 1 or more doses of a COVID-19 vaccine at the time of 
the event. Unvaccinated were defined as individuals without any vaccine dose. We further 
describe how many adolescents were fully vaccinated with all recommended doses administered 
more than 14 days prior to the event, and how many were partially vaccinated. 

The incidence of COVID-19 in vaccinated individuals was computed by taking the total number of 
COVID-19 positive cases in the vaccinated group (numerator) divided by the total number of 
vaccinated individuals (denominator) multiplied by 100. The incidence of COVID-19 in the 
unvaccinated group was computed by taking the total number of COVID-19 positive cases in the 
unvaccinated group (numerator) divided by the total number of unvaccinated individuals 
(denominator) multiplied by 100. Confidence intervals were constructed using the exact Clopper-
Pearson method (Desu and Raghavarao, 2003).  

After the event, positive and negative results from each participant were determined with different 
commercial COVID-19 test kits at private laboratories (PCR or rapid antigen). Given that there 
were some individuals that only took a rapid antigen test and its sensitivity is lower than the PCR 
“gold standard” tests, they were included in the COVID-19 positive cohort if they reported more 
than 3 symptoms including anosmia, even if the rapid antigen test was falsely negative and no 
PCR test was performed (Pilarowski et al., 2021). The symptoms of each group were described 
using categorical data by frequency and percentage, and compared with 𝝌2 among the 
vaccinated and unvaccinated groups.  

Extracted RNA isolated with the TRIzol protocol (TRIzolTM Reagent, no date; Rio et al., 2010) from 
a sample of a SARS-CoV-2 fully vaccinated symptomatic positive patient, with a Ct value of 22.53 
using the RIDAGENE SARS-COV-2 RT-PCR MULTIPLEX kit (R-BIOPHARM AG), was used to 
prepare an Illumina library using the Artic v3 protocol as described in (Pipelines R&D et al., 2020). 
The SARS-CoV-2 amplicons library was prepared and sequenced at the “Unidad Universitaria de 
Secuenciación Masiva y Bioinformatica - UNAM” using the Illumina NextSeq500 platform with a 
300 cycle kit with a pair end configuration to obtain reads with a 150 base pair length. 

About 3 million paired end reads were obtained and processed using the ncov2019-artic-nf 
pipeline (GitHub, 2021) with default parameters. The reconstructed genome in fasta format, was 
analyzed at the Pangolin COVID-19 Lineage Assigner site (À. O’toole, V. Hill JT. McCrone, E. 
Scher, A. Rambaut, 2021) to obtain the lineage of the sequenced virus. 

All of the individuals that were invited to the event answered the questionnaire (N=199). A total of 
35 were excluded, six because their parents did not give authorization to participate in the study, 
and 29 because they did not attend the event.  

As shown in Figure 1, the studied population included N=164 adolescents. The mean age was 
16.8 (SD 1.07) and the age ranged from 15 to 19. 53.7% were male and 46.3% female. In the 
past year 28.7% (N=47) had COVID-19 and were fully recuperated before the event; none of 
these adolescents developed COVID-19 during the event. Of the attendees, 43% were vaccinated 
(n=70) and 57% (n=94) were unvaccinated. 98.8% performed an antigen test 24 hours prior to 
the event. The 2 people that did not take the test before the event, took a test after the party and 
resulted negative. The total incidence of COVID-19 in the total studied population was 25% 
(95%CI 18.6 to 32.4) (N=41). There were 2 people that were positive in the antigen rapid test 
taken 24 hours before the event. One was vaccinated and reported using a face mask during 
most of the event, the other one was not vaccinated and took off its face mask during most of the 
event. The rest (98.4%) had a negative antigen test result prior to the event. Most (87.8%) only 
used a face mask to enter the event and removed it once inside or did not use it at all. Most of 
the participants remained for 2 or more hours in the event (86.4%) and were indoors most of the 
time (82.9%). High volume music was played at all times in the non-ventilated indoor area, 
increasing the risk of SARS-CoV-2 transmission through elevated vocal effort contributing to 
higher aerosol emissions (Kopechek, 2020). 

After the event 90.3% (148) took a COVID-19 test, 33.6% took a PCR test, and 56.7% a rapid 
antigen test. 41 people were COVID-19 positive, of which 35 had a positive test result and 6 had 
a negative test result or did not have a test but reported 6 symptoms including anosmia. 

Out of the 41 adolescents with COVID-19, 75.6% said no one got sick around them (secondary 
infections), 19.6% said they infected 1 or 2 more persons. 73.2% said they did not have any 
contact with other persons, 7.3% had contact with 3 to 4 persons, and 7.3% had contact with 5 to 
6 persons. None of the adolescents or their close contacts were hospitalized or died.  

In total, there were 70 (42.7%) people that were vaccinated with at least one dose, 50 persons 
were fully vaccinated and 20 were partially vaccinated. 19 (27.1%) had COVID-19 in the year 
before the event and fully recovered before attending the event; none had a reinfection due to the 
event. 92.9% reported not using a face mask during the event. After the party, 8 (11.4%) out of 
the 70 vaccinated adolescents resulted COVID-19 positive; 7 (14%) were fully vaccinated and 1 
(5%) was partially vaccinated. Only one fully vaccinated person was asymptomatic. The most 
common symptoms were runny nose, anosmia, fatigue, general discomfort, cough, ageusia and 
low fever.  

In total there were 94 (57.3%) people that were unvaccinated. 28 (29.8%) had COVID-19 in the 
year before the event and fully recovered before attending the event; none had a reinfection due 
to the event. 83.7% reported not using a face mask during the event. After the party, 33 (35.1%) 
of the unvaccinated adolescents were COVID-19 positive; there were no asymptomatic persons 
in this cohort. The most common symptoms were fatigue, anosmia, general discomfort, runny 
nose, cough, low fever and ageusia.  

In Table 1 we present that the incidence of COVID-19 in unvaccinated individuals was 35.1% 
(95%CI 25.5 to 45.6), and in vaccinated individuals was 11.4% (95%CI 5.1 to 21.3). There was a 
statistically significant difference of COVID infected individuals in the unvaccinated group 
compared to the vaccinated group (𝝌2= 12.6, p=0.00). The Odds Ratio when comparing 
unvaccinated vs. vaccinated was of 4.19 (95%CI 1.79-9.8).  

In Figure 2 we present the symptoms reported both by the vaccinated and unvaccinated 
adolescents. The mean number of symptoms was 6 in both the vaccinated and unvaccinated 
cohorts. Vaccinated adolescents reported a runny nose more frequently (87.5% vs 48.5% 
p=0.046). Unvaccinated adolescents reported fatigue more frequently (90.9% vs 62.5% p=0.04). 
The rest of the reported symptoms, including anosmia, were present in both vaccinated and 
unvaccinated individuals (75.0% and 72.7% respectively).  

A sample of one of the symptomatic fully vaccinated individuals was sequenced using the 
extracted RNA material from the positive qPCR test as described in our Methods. The result was 
a genome with a 99.48% coverage assigned as the Delta variant of concern (B.1.617.2) lineage 
according to the Pangolin COVID-19 Lineage Assigner website. Sequence was submitted to 
GISAID, Submission Number: EPI_ISL_3982391 

This study shows that in the described superspreading event the unvaccinated adolescent cohort 
had a statistically higher incidence of COVID-19 than the vaccinated adolescent cohort. The 
incidence of COVID-19 in the unvaccinated cohort was 35.1% (95%CI 26.1 to 46.5), and in the 
vaccinated cohort was 11.4% (95%CI 5.1 to 21.3), (crude OR= 4.19 (95%CI 1.79-9.8). Almost all 
COVID-19 positive adolescents (40 out of the 41) developed more than one symptom. Only one 
fully vaccinated positive individual was asymptomatic. We found that although vaccines 
decreased the risk of getting COVID-19, once an adolescent was infected with COVID-19, the 
symptoms were similar for both vaccinated and unvaccinated persons including fatigue, runny 
nose, anosmia, general discomfort, ageusia, fever and cough. Fatigue was more common in 
unvaccinated adolescents, and runny nose in vaccinated adolescents.  

In the anonymous questionnaire, 47 (28.6%) attendees reported having COVID-19 during the 
previous year and were fully recovered before the event, 28 were not vaccinated and 19 were 
vaccinated with at least one dose. No reinfection resulted from this event. All 47 previously 
infected adolescents were negative and did not have symptoms after the event. This is consistent 
with the lower risk of reinfection found by other authors in people younger than 65 years of age 
(Hansen et al., 2021) and the preliminary data that shows that natural immunity confers higher 
protection against infection with Delta VOC than vaccine-induced immunity (Gazit et al., 2021). In 
this study we cannot assume that the superspreading event was caused by Delta since we only 
sequenced one sample from a symptomatic fully vaccinated individual, however we did observe 
a higher risk of infection in naive or vaccinated adolescents than in recovered individuals with 
natural immunity. 

A breakthrough infection is defined as the detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in a PCR test or positive 
rapid antigen test in a respiratory specimen collected from a person ≥14 days after receipt of all 
recommended doses of a COVID-19 vaccine (Bergwerk et al., 2021). In our vaccinated cohort 
(70) we had 20 individuals partially vaccinated of whom 1 (5%) had COVID-19 and 50 fully 
vaccinated individuals of whom 7 (14%) had breakthrough infections. In most countries, 
breakthrough infections are only monitored if a fully vaccinated patient is hospitalized or dies. A 
study in Israel found that health care workers with breakthrough infections accounted for 2.6% of 
fully vaccinated individuals and persistent symptoms were present in 19% of COVID-19 cases 
(COVID-19 vaccine breakthrough cases: Data from the states, 2021). To date, there is no 
information on mild breakthrough infections in adolescents. 

24.4% reported secondary infections of close contacts. None of the adolescents in this study nor 
their positive close contacts resulted in severe cases, needed hospitalization or died of COVID-
19. The results of this study are in line with other studies that show that COVID-19 vaccines are 
highly effective for preventing hospitalization and death (Mlcochova et al., 2021; Sheikh et al., 
2021). Vaccinated adolescents can develop mild or moderate symptoms when infected with 
SARS-CoV-2 and overall, they have less risk of severe disease or death due to COVID-19 than 
older individuals.  

Understanding the setting of the event might explain why one of every four attendees was found 
positive. Of the total 164 attendees, 86.4% reported being present for 2 or more hours, where 
82.9% were mostly in the enclosed non-ventilated environment and 87.8% did not use face masks 
nor kept social distancing measures. High volume music was played at all times in the indoor non-
ventilated area, increasing the risk of SARS-CoV-2 transmission through elevated vocal effort 
contributing to higher aerosol emissions (Kopechek, 2020; Bergwerk et al., 2021). Of the 41 
COVID-19 resulting positive individuals, 37 (90.3%) were at the event for over 2 hours, reported 
being in the enclosed environment at all times and none (100%) used a face mask at any time. 
The only mitigating measure that the adolescents took to ensure a safe event was to perform a 
rapid antigen test 24 hours prior to the event, in which two adolescents were positive and still 
attended the event. Of these two positive individuals, one was vaccinated and reported wearing 
a face mask at all times while the other positive individual was not vaccinated and did not wear a 
face mask at all. This superspreading event shows the lack of knowledge, low risk assessment 
and the hesitance to implement several layers of protection. The analysis of this superspreading 
event shows how taking only one measure, in this case the 24-hour prior antigen test, was not 
enough to minimize the risk of infection. As the Swiss Cheese Model by James Reason suggests, 
(Perneger, 2005; Azuma et al., 2020) knowing that there isn't a mitigation measure with 100% 
protection it is imperative to employ several layers of protection to reduce the risk of transmission 
and infection. In this scenario, without multiple transmission mitigation measures like admitting 
only negative adolescents, having proper ventilation, universal use of face masks, lower volume 
music, and social distancing, the superspreading event occurred.  

One of the nasopharyngeal samples from a symptomatic fully vaccinated individual was 
sequenced. It was determined that it was the Delta variant of concern (VOC) which at that time 
was present in only 2.12% of samples screened according to the National Genomic Program´s 
report of June by the Consorcio de Vigilancia Genómica in Mexico (Programa de Vigilancia 
Genómica, no date). We cannot conclude that this superspreading event was caused by this VOC 
because at least two positive individuals attended the event, however it was relevant to detect 
Delta as the dynamic of the spread could help describe Delta´s ability to infect adolescents, both 
vaccinated and unvaccinated, and a lack of mitigation measures are employed. Also, this study 
can give some sense of how Delta can cause breakthrough infections even when the BNT162b2 
(Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine) reported being 100% effective in their phase 3 study involving 
adolescents while other variants were circulating (Frenck et al., 2021). As reported previously, 
Delta variant infections dominate vaccine-breakthrough cases in other countries such as India 
and the United Kingdom, probably driven by a combination of evasion of neutralising antibodies 
and increased virus infectivity (Mlcochova et al., 2021). 

The strengths of this study are the high rate of participation, that almost all were tested for COVID-
19 before and after the event, and that the conditions during which the private event was held 
were constant for most of the attendees. The limitations of this study are that it was not possible 
to sequence all COVID-19 positive adolescents to determine if they all had the Delta variant and 
not all of the vaccinated individuals were fully vaccinated. Future studies are needed to determine 
the incidence of COVID-19 in adolescents in fully vaccinated individuals in bigger samples to be 
able to determine if the incidence is similar to what is observed in this smaller population and if 
the symptoms of vaccinated and unvaccinated individuals are similar.  

Spreading events have become more common since vaccinated individuals engage with other 
people in social events, with almost complete relaxation of safety measures. Interesting to note 
that two positive cases were from adolescents that decided not to miss the event regardless of 
their condition. This reckless behavior puts other people in a vulnerable position where infection 
with a VOC is more probable, especially in places with high community transmission. The results 
of this study show the permeability of implementing a unique mitigating strategy thus evidencing 
the urgency to communicate the importance of layering protective measures to reduce risk of 
transmission and infection during the COVID-19 pandemic.  

We would like to thank Sandra López-León MD PhD for her guidance as an epidemiologist, 
physician and her support in the data analysis and interpretation. Bioethicist German Carreto 
Chavez reviewed and approved the questioner and the project.  He determined that there was no 
risk for any of the participants. That anonymization of the participant was guaranteed, and the 
bioethical international guidelines were followed since all participants and/or their parents, when 
needed, were signed. A special thanks to Ariela Landsmanas Goldberg for providing crucial 
information and helping with the distribution of the questionnaire. We acknowledge Ricardo 
Grande and Karel Estrada for their support in sequencing and bioinformatics technical support, 
respectively and who are part of the “Unidad Universitaria de Secuenciación Masiva y 
Bioinformática - UNAM'' and "Laboratorio Nacional de Apoyo Tecnológico a las Ciencias 
Genómicas - CONACyT" 
