The social distance critical to alleviate the spread of COVID-19 is quite insufficient. In order to contribute to the literature, "(1) When a rare virus such as COVID-19 appears, when the total level of social distance has natural inertia; (2) Open national public statements are essential to reduce this inertia and adjust the public's behavior to a new, optimal social distance level. (3) When individuals are not adequately informed about optimal social distance levels over time, national communication is more effective than local communication.
We focused on a model of social removal, motivated by the COVID-19 outbreak, where people value both joining the right social distance and complying with other people's social norms. When citizens consider these two issues and are unsure of each other's beliefs about the right social distance, collective social distancing shows significant inertia. In particular, by following the positive shock towards the correct social distance, the total social distances will be well below the social optimum, even if the information of the individuals reflects this shock correctly. (Proposition 3). Citizens care to comply with social norms. For example, many make a strange shopping in a mask, risking disturbing a neighbor by waiting for the next elevator, rejecting an outstretched hand, or banning gaming games if other citizens are not doing the same. These concerns create inertia. actions of citizens ensure that their common knowledge of past social distance behaviors follows the social norms by coordinating the social distance. This inertia is problematic because society will be better off coordinating a new, higher social distance.
How can the state improve this situation? Our recommendation 4 shows that public statements about the new optimal level of social departure from leading leaders reduce inertia by generating new common information that allows people to coordinate their actions around new, more appropriate norms.
Should such statements be made public or more specifically? Proposition 5 shows that when optimal social distance levels have a high correlation over time and individuals are poorly informed, national communication is better than local communication, so that previous social distance norms are overweight.
This result reflects that the information transmitted publicly creates new common information.
Allcott et al. (2020) examines the perception of risk in the United States and the interaction between such externalities. The importance of citizens who sacrificed the interests of Dube and Baicker (2020) for greater well-being and Christensen et al. (2020) Examining the Ebola crisis in Sierra Leon highlights the importance of trust in local leaders and institutions.
In contrast, our analysis highlights the role of social norms and strategic uncertainty as a source of counter-productive inertia in collective social distance.
Government results are also very different. While information alone cannot solve the problem of standard externalities, clear and consistent public information can significantly increase social distance by reducing strategic uncertainty and enabling citizens to coordinate on new norms. National networks produce more widespread information, enabling citizens to better coordinate on the new social withdrawal norms.
What sorts of decisions might our norms-based model represent in the context of the COVID-19 crisis? The key features of the model are that: (1) people are uncertain about the right level of social distancing and are uncertain about what others believe, (2) the right level of social distancing exhibits serial correlation, and (3) there is a desire for conformity with social norms.
An important application of our model concerns social gatherings. The advent of COVID-19 made it undesirable, from a social welfare perspective, for people to partici- pate in events such as St. Patrick’s Day celebrations, spring break trips and parties, or sporting events. However, people were uncertain about the threat that COVID-19 posed. Crucially, to the extent that they believed others might think that the threat was modest and therefore continue to gather, they too had incentives to behave this way. The result was undesirable inertia—people continued past practices in ways that harmed social welfare.
Similar arguments hold for social practices such as hand shaking, kissing, and other forms of physical social greetings. It is awkward to refuse to shake an offered hand—as a recent presidential press briefing illustrated—creating a force for social conformity of the sort we model. The uncertainty about others’ views on COVID-19 created unfortunate inertia in physical social greetings.
Our model also applies to some professional settings. If employees believe that continu- ing to come to the office signals commitment or ambition, then this creates social pressure for employees to continue coming to work if their managers or supervisors are. In the face of such pressure, the model suggests, there will be inertia that keeps people coming into the office at inefficiently high levels, especially during the early days of a viral outbreak1
Finally, the model also helps understand inertia in social distancing and its policy implications, not only at the initial outset of a contagious virus, but at any point where there is a sharp change in the appropriate level of social distancing.
We utilize a standard “beauty contest” model in which individuals aim to take actions that match an uncertain state of the world (the right action) while remaining close to the average action in the population. Subsequent literature explored the welfare consequences of this insight and its implications for optimal communication (Morris and Shin 2007; Angeletos and Pavan 2007). This framework has been applied to study a wide range of topics from monetary policy (Lorenzoni 2010) to leadership in party conferences (Dewan and Myatt 2007), organizations (Bolton et al. 2013), and judiciaries (Shadmehr et al. 2019). Our paper provides an application in disease control and public health policy.
Our paper is also related to the game theoretic literature on social norms. We adopt Acemoglu and Jackson’s (2017) definition of social norms as “the distribution of anticipated payoff-relevant behavior” (p. 246). Our model has a unique equilibrium, and social norms in our setting refer to the average (social distancing) behavior of the population. When agents are heterogeneously informed, the anticipated average behavior depends on the individual’s information. We model people’s desire to conform to social norms as a desire to do what is expected of them, as reflected in other people’s behavior. The challenge of a global pandemic is that it creates uncertainty about what people expect of one another and how people will behave, leading people to lean on past, inappropriate, norms of behavior.
In contrast to these papers, agents in our setting are uncertain about the right action and about one anothers’ information in a changing world. While Acemoglu and Jackson (2015, 2017) focus on patterns of cooperation and compliance, our focus is on inertia and over- reactions to public information in a world where optimal aggregate behavior evolves over time and on the resulting policy implications.
We now analyze how citizens actually behave, given their concern for taking the right action and for social conformity. Because there is a continuum of citizens, a citizen’s action does not affect the aggregate outcome, either in the current or in future periods. Thus, the only link between periods is information. From equation (1), citizen i chooses the following degree of social distancing:
Citizens have common knowledge that, on average, the right action today is the right action yesterday (i.e., θt ∼ N (θt−1, σu)) and hence over-weight this fact. As a result, today’s aggregate action is biased in the direction of yesterday’s right action. As a consequence, following a large positive shock, like COVID-19, to the right amount of social distancing, the aggregate action will be lower than the right action.5
Now, suppose in each period t, in addition to the their private signals xit, citizens also receive a public signal pt = θt + ηt, with ηt ∼ iidN (0, ση ). Such a public signal might be the result of information conveyed by the government. Proposition 2 and equation (4) still hold because they do not depend on the details of available information. However, the presence of public signals changes the degree of inertia in aggregate social distancing.
Proposition 4 shows that, following a shock, an informed leader can send a public signal that helps set public expectations about the aggregate right action, thereby reducing inertia in social distancing driven by the desire to conform. The clearer that message (i.e., the lower ση ), the more this will reduce inertia.
Given the overreaction by citizens to public messages described above, one may wonder whether there is a better way for the government to deliver information. Would it be better for citizens to receive the same level of information, but privately rather than publicly? For instance, perhaps employers or local governments could provide private information to citizens, rather than them all observing the same public information in a presidential speech or press conference.
When citizens believe the past is highly informative about the present (σu small) or that they are privately poorly-informed (σE large), citizens put too much weight on their past experience. In such circumstances, it is better for the government to communicate publicly rather than privately. Citizens over-react to the government’s public messages. But that will help to counter-act their over-reaction to their past experience. By contrast, when citizens believe the past is relatively uninformative (σu large) or that they are privately well-informed (σE small), the government should communicate privately.
In the context of social distancing in the wake of a new and rare infectious disease, individuals’ information is typically very noisy (σE is large) and the appropriate level of social distancing is very sticky (σu is low, the disease is a very unusual shock). As such, for social distancing in the wake of COVID-19, clear and consistent public statements by a national leader are more effective than statements by local governments or employers, not because the national government is more informed, but because clear national statements generate over-reaction that is beneficial to correct the inertia created by the over-weighting of past habits and social norms.