Brazilian Portuguese data provide evidence to the claim I make in this paper that there are 
appositive free relatives, contrary to what Emonds (1979) states, for whom free relatives cannot 
have appositive semantics or syntax. I argue there are reasons to believe the wh-sentence 
evidenced in the title of this paper is in fact a free relative that carries appositive content, 
considering issues such as distribution, matching, the nature of quem and semantic content. The 
quem-type sentence I put into analysis in the present paper differs from an ordinary (headed) 
appositive relative clause for it seems to be juxtaposed to the nominal it relates to, being 
equivalent to it, a condition that leads to the impossibility of a relativization process in Kaynes’s 
(1994) terms for the derivation of this kind of sentence. 

Though very frequent in natural languages, apposition as a syntactic phenomenon is not trivial 
if one takes its characterization into account. Many questions might be raised when one focuses 
on such constructions, the main one being: what is its nature? Is it to be considered as containing 
its own proper syntax? (see Meyer, 1992). In the present paper, I am concerned with the nature 
of Brazilian Portuguese appositive sentences such as the ones bracketed in (1) below: 

I will argue that sentences like (1) a and b contain a free relative clause that holds appositive 
content, instead of considering them ordinary appositive relatives. The aim of the discussion I 
shall implement here is twofold: 1) trying to explain what the structure/function of the wh-
sentence in the utterances might be; and 2) making sure these are not ordinary appositive 
relative clauses such as the subordinate in (2): 

There are empirical reasons to believe (1) and (2) present different structures in Brazilian 
Portuguese, due to some syntactic behavior illustrated by the paradigm below: 

As one can perfectly see, it is possible to elide the first element of the apposition in (3a), but 
not in (4a); it is also possible to switch the positions of the nominal and the subordinate sentence 
in (3b), but not in (4b). Besides this, the wh-sentence can be extraposed in (3c), while the 
extraposition of the appositive clause is blocked in (4c). 

It is therefore necessary to search for an explanation for these facts, and it seems that this 
explanation lies in the characterization of both types of sentence, as well as in the description 
of their syntactic-semantical behavior. In order to implement the analysis, I shall first discuss 
briefly the characteristics of apposition; then, I shall focus on the examination of appositive 
sentences, especially the Brazilian Portuguese data found in (1) and (2). 
The paper is organized as follows: in section 1, I discuss apposition in general and sentential 
apposition, as well discussing the typology of sentential apposition in Brazilian Portuguese. In 
section 2, I focus on Brazilian Portuguese QUEM sentences, with a special look at free relative 
sentences. Section 3 contains the analysis I implement in this paper and section 4 holds the final 
remarks. 

In this section I present general discussion on the phenomenon of apposition, as well as discuss 
some cases of apposition in Brazilian Portuguese. 

Apposition is usually understood as the relation between what some have called the anchor (see 
Huddleston & Pullum, 2002) and the appositive expression itself, both keeping some sort of 
equivalence (Heringa, 2011). An appositional construction might, then, present two juxtaposed 
expressions (nominal in general) as in (5): 

Generative studies usually categorize apposition as a twofold phenomenon based on functional 
properties: there can be something as reformulative apposition and something as attributive 
apposition (see McCawley, 1998; Cardoso & De Vries, 2010; Heringa, 2011). Griffiths (2015) 
exemplifies reformulative apposition with data in (6): 

The idea is that the apposition in (6) provides to the anchor (The big apple) some additional 
information, some sort of specification on this anchor. As for attributive apposition, the author 
mentions Cardoso & De Vries (2010), for whom the kind of apposition in (7) is derived from a 
reduced relative clause, with an unpronounced copula and relative pronoun; i.e. it contains some 
sort of predication on the anchor: 

In one case or another, both types of appositives are said to be somehow coordinated to their 
anchors, this being attested by many relevant studies (see Döring, 2014; Ott, 2014), though 
Griffiths (2015) might himself argue, with very convincing empirical material, that 
reformulative apposition behaves as a coordinated structure1, while attributive appositives are 
elements integrating a finite parenthetical copular clause with unpronounced material, namely 
the copula and the relative pronoun. 

I am not putting this idea into detail here, considering the scope of the discussion in the present 
paper; I might, however, get part of some generalization made here as part of my argumentation. 
Focusing on Brazilian Portuguese, traditional analysis mostly understands apposition as 
coordination. Rocha Lima (2011), for instance, proposes appositive phrases are nominal 
constructions that can follow immediately some other nominal phrase, to which they are 
coreferential, i.e., both designate the same being. Just check (8) and (9): 

Cunha & Cintra (2008) propose something similar: appositive phrases have nominal nature, are 
coreferential to the nominal they are related, and are juxtaposed2. Cunha & Cintra, however, 
observe that appositive constructions cannot have adjectival nature, because they constitute a 
unit that indicates the same being their related nominal points out to, but never characterize it 
(p. 174). In the following section, I turn to sentential appositives, their constitution and 
functioning. 

In addition to structures of apposition such as (5), (6), (7), (8) and (9), languages also present 
the kind of appositive structures in (10) and (11), which must be addressed differently, due to 
their syntactic behavior: 

Concerning the data above, one must understand the structure of each kind of appositive as 
relating to different derivational processes. Examples in (b) are appositive relative clauses, 
whose derivation is said to include a head raising operation (see Kayne,1994), while for (10) 
and (11)a there seems not to be any relativization process involved. Hence, for (10)b and (11)b, 
the derivation goes as follows: 

As for the examples in (10) and (11)a, the anchor seems to be base generated as the argument 
of the main verb and followed by some sort of specification (the appositive juxtaposed CP) in 
a kind of adjunction: 

Crosslinguistically, one might register significant differences between (10)a and (11)a, due to 
some lexical properties of Portuguese which are different from those in English. In Brazilian 
Portuguese, the construction corresponding to (10)a does not contain an appositive sentence, 
but a completive, selected by a preposition: 

I will also put this divergence aside here, as I am in fact interested in investigating the 
proximity/similarity between the apposition in (11)a and the data in (1), which I aim to analyze 
specifically in this paper. What is essential, though, is observing that, in Brazilian Portuguese, 
the configuration of the apposition in (11)a is syntactically different from what happens in 
(11)b, as the latter is constituted by a relative clause, but not the former3.  

If one focuses on Brazilian Portuguese appositive clauses, this is the scenario. As many 
languages, BP exhibits two different kinds of sentential appositive: one with nominal nature 
and another one with adjectival nature (a relative clause); the bracketed sentences in (15) and 
(16) are examples: 

If one analyzes (15) and (16) carefully, one might easily conclude that they are different 
structures (with obvious different syntactic behavior), mainly if we take into account, for 
example, the fact that the anchor can be elided in (15), but not in (16), as we can see by (17) 
and (18) bellow:  

If we consider the whole que sentence in (17) to have taken the place of the elided anchor 
working as the complement of the verb disse, it becomes clear that the subordinate clause in 
(15) is being directly selected by the matrix verb, this – of course – due to the selectional 
properties of a verb like disse (we could call it a CP with a DP-like nature). (16), by its turn, 
might be different from (15), because the ellipsis of the anchor is not allowed, as (18) shows. 
This constitutes evidence that the que sentence in this case cannot be associated to the position 
of the anchor, since it is an ordinary CP (not a DP-like CP) in that context – when a DP is being 
selected by the matrix verb. Moreover, the asymmetry between (15) and (16) seems to be 
confirmed by the contrast observed in (19) and (20) bellow: 

As it is clear by the data, the anchor and the apposition can switch places in (19), but not in 
(20), what constitutes additional evidence for the non-correspondence of such structures in 
terms of their syntactic nature. A third fact on the asymmetry, is related to the possibility of 
extraposing the apposition, which is possible in (15), but blocked in (16), as we can see in (21) 
and (22) bellow: 

The conclusion is, then: what we call here nominal appositive clauses (example in (15)) and 
appositive relative clauses (what is found in (16)), though semantically similar, are syntactically 
divergent. Those differences will prove crucial when implementing the analysis of the wh-
sentences being focused in the present paper. 

The question now is: what connects (15) to (1)? Are they similar? What kind of sentence is the 
wh-sentence in (1)? What makes (16) different from (1)? I will go through the analysis of those 
facts in the following sections. 

The wh-word quem is multifunctional in Brazilian Portuguese. One can find quem working as 
an interrogative pronoun, introducing a wh-question (23), a relative pronoun, introducing a 
relative CP (24), or a wh-phrase introducing a free relative clause (25): 

Macambira (1998), considering morphosyntactic aspects of quem, attests it can be an indefinite 
interrogative (23), an ordinary relative pronoun (24), and an indefinite relative (25). Hence, in 
each occurrence, quem is considered to represent a distinct item with proper morphosyntactic 
characteristics. 

If one considers (23)a, there are no doubts on the nature of quem; it is clearly an interrogative 
pronoun carrying a strong [+wh] feature, responsible for the displacement of this lexical item 
from its base position to the periphery of the clause (Chomsky, 1977; Cheng, 1991; Rizzi, 
1991). 

In (23)b, quem is also an interrogative pronoun (carrying a strong [+wh] as well), now in an 
embedded interrogative clause; as in (23)a, it is affected by wh-movement and displaced to the 
frontier of the subordinate clause.5 

Specifically about the type of quem in sentences like (25), Rocha (1990) considers it to be the 
result of some kind of morphological amalgam, in which a relative pronoun and its antecedent 
nominal are supposed to be “condensed” (in her words amalgamated) in one single item, as 
shown in the representation bellow: 

Medeiros Junior (2005) considers Rocha (1990) to be correct in her analysis, since it is 
impossible to insert a DP as the antecedent of quem in sentences of this kind, just as seen in 
(27): 

One might observe, however, that in (24) quem is related to a nominal antecedent. But, if we 
take a close look on this sentence, it becomes clear that the quem-type lexical item in this case 
behaves as an ordinary relative pronoun, as it can be seen in (28) below, where quem can 
perfectly be replaced by the relative que or a qual (see Macambira, 1998; Medeiros Junior, 
2006): 

Let us then discuss in more detail the structure/type of the sentences introduced by quem in 
Brazilian Portuguese. 

As described in the previous section, interrogatives, headed relatives and free relatives can be 
introduced by quem. Let us take a close look on each type of sentence and focus their syntactic 
behavior. 

An interrogative sentence is, first and foremost, a request for information. But, besides this, 
there are some relevant syntactical aspects that must be considered in the constitution of this 
kind of structure. 
 
Since Chomsky (1977), those sentences are said to be derived via wh-movement; i.e., the wh-
phrase in those constructions appears in a position that is different from the one it is generated, 
which the author formulates in terms of a rule: 

In a more recent investigation, wh-movement has been treated as a result of a checking 
operation, which is necessary in order to verify a strong [+wh] feature in a wh-operator; such 
an operation would only be possible in a specific configuration, namely, a Spec-head 
configuration (Cheng, 1991; Rizzi, 1991): 

Both – root and indirect questions – would in principle be affected by the same operation, 
throughout which, their similar structures are built6. But one close look on indirect questions 
and one might see they are a bit different from root interrogatives. 

Root interrogatives, just as (32) a, don’t seem to elicit many problems in terms of their 
derivation or structure: they are CPs, derived via wh-movement of an operator to its periphery, 
to the specifier of a Focus projection according to Rizzi (1997). The author comes to this 
conclusion by focusing the following data: 

The conclusion driven from those data is: if Focusing and wh-fronting cannot cooccur, it might 
be the case that both – the focalized constituent and the wh-phrase – are “fighting” for the same 
position. Hence, wh-fronting might posit wh-operators in Spec, FocP. 

Embedded interrogatives ((32)b), however, seem to be slightly different; though they are 
understood to be derived via wh-movement all the same, Italian data, according to Rizzi (1997) 
and Rizzi & Bocci (2017), provide evidence to propose that the displaced wh-element doesn’t 
seem to be focalized, because one might not find the same restrictions observed in matrix within 
an embedded context; in subordinate clauses, wh-operators are said to occupy the Spec position 
of an EmbQ projection. 

Brazilian Portuguese exhibits root and embedded interrogatives introduced by quem (34) and 
(35) respectively: 

As for Brazilian Portuguese, Rizzi and Bocci´s analysis seems to fit perfectly: 1) root and 
embedded interrogatives are derived via wh-movement; 2) in root interrogatives, the wh-
element is focalized; 3) in embedded interrogatives, the wh-operator is raised even if there is a 
focalized constituent: 

A relative clause is a nominal modifier that integrates a complex DP (Chierchia, 2003) and have 
been analyzed, in early works, as being right adjoined to N (Chomksy, 1977); however, these 
structures have been recently reanalyzed as a complement of D within the complex DP (Kayne, 
1994)7.  
 
In Brazilian Portuguese, relative clauses have been analyzed as always involving wh-movement 
(Kato & Nunes, 2009), or sometimes not (Tarallo, 1984; Kennedy, 2007; Medeiros Junior, 
2020). Apart from this divergence, which I shall not address in this paper, the relative CP (in 
Portuguese) is usually introduced by que: 

As stated in the section What it means being appositive, quem can also be an ordinary relative 
pronoun in Brazilian Portuguese, i.e., it can introduce a headed relative clause: 

One might observe, however, that quem can only be connected to a nominal antecedent if it is 
the complement of a preposition, otherwise, the sentence is not acceptable: 

A free relative is a relative clause that is not connected to a nominal in the relevant syntactic 
context. These constructions have been analyzed as DP constructions in argument position 
(Caponigro, 2002; Citko, 2004; Medeiros Junior, 2005; Marchesan, 2008). Data in (41) contain 
free relative clauses: 

The wh-sentences in (41), though remarkably similar to the one in (35), are DP-like structures. 
The embedded sentence in (35), by its turn, constitutes a regular CP with a strong [+wh] features 
which is selected by the matrix verb. 

Besides the selection properties of the matrix verb, which clearly selects a question in (35), but 
not in (41), free relatives are said to be affected by the so-called matching effect (Bresnan & 
Grimshaw, 1977; Larson, 1987; Vogel, 2003)8. The matching requirement states that the 
category/C(c)ase of the wh-phrase must match the selection properties of the verb of the matrix 
and of the one in the relative. A mismatch will cause the sentence to be ungrammatical. Indirect 
questions are not subject to the same requirement, as it gets clear from the contrast in (42)/(43): 

According to Medeiros Junior (2015), Brazilian Portuguese free relatives seem to require 
matching even in subject position, though many studies attest this condition must not apply 
concerning pro-drop languages (see Hirshbühler & Rivero, 1983; Suñer, 1983, 1984; Grosu, 
1994; Izvorski, 1996,1997); this can be seen in the data bellow: 

If one turns to semantics, free relatives are said to hold maximalizing content (Grosu & 
Landman, 1998). The main idea is that free relatives with a realis verb form contain a 
semantically CP-internal head and some material external to the CP, namely a phonologically 
empty pro. In this situation, the semantics of the external material is totally determined by the 
meaning of the CP (Grosu & Landman, 1998, p. 158). This being so, the semantics of such a 
sentence must contain a maximal reading (preferably universal), as opposed to what happens 
in interrogatives or cleft sentences, which hold a definite reading: 

Medeiros Junior (2014) proposes all free relatives in Brazilian Portuguese are of the type wh-
ever, considering its semantic content. The author argues that the wh-words in these 
constructions are complex morphological items resulting from an intricate syntactic operation 
of head incorporation of D into C, triggered by the presence of a null -ever suffix in D; in this 
language, wh-words in free relatives bare universal interpretation. Free relatives’ universal 
semantics in BP would then be the result of its syntactic derivation, demonstrated by the 
diagram in (46)9: 

Let us now turn into the analysis of the data in (1), which is in fact the main point of the present 
study. 

In a seminal study from 1979, Emonds evaluates the phenomenon of relative clauses and attest 
that a free relative could have appositive content. And it is in fact nonsense thinking of a free 
structure (which, by its own nature, should not relate straightforwardly to some realized 
syntactic material) that must somehow be connected to an anchor (hence, an antecedent). 

I will argue in the following sections there are reasons to believe – considering BP data – that 
Emonds was partially wrong in his assumptions. Let us put things straight. 

Let us turn back to data in (1)a repeated as (47) and (16) repeated as (48) bellow: 

The wh-sentence in (47) really looks as much like an ordinary relative appositive as the one in 
(48): both have appositive content, and both seem to be introduced by a relative pronoun. 
However, if one considers syntactic behavior, we might realize they are in fact different. Part 
of that difference we have already pointed out in the introducing section: 
 
1. It is possible to elide the anchor in (47), but not in (48): 

2. The anchor and the appositive can switch places in (47), but not in (48): 

3. Many speakers accept an utterance where the wh-sentence can be extraposed in (47), but 
never in (48): 

However, if one focuses on (15), repeated below as (52), one might notice something intriguing: 
it behaves exactly like (47): 

What might be the case here? Let us try to solve this puzzle. 

As argued in section 1.3, the appositive in (52) is an ordinary CP (what we have called here a 
DP-like CP), directly selected by the matrix verb, juxtaposed to the nominal anchor “uma só 
coisa”. This suggests that the Wh-sentence in (47) might also be juxtaposed to the nominal “Um 
fã teu”. Ordinary appositive relatives are supposed to work differently; in fact, an appositive 
relative clause cannot be juxtaposed to the anchor, for the anchor is the nominal being 
relativized, which has been raised from within the relative clause (see Kayne, 1994; Bianchi, 
1999). 

Syntactically, the head of the appositive relative in (48) is the complement of a higher D and 
the relativized NP is still within CP, i.e., in its Spec: 

What about the wh-sentence in (47)? What is the nature of this sentence? Well, there are reasons 
to believe it is in fact a free relative clause. Let us turn to the arguments on this idea. First, when 
we look at (47), it seems that the wh-sentence is being selected as the external argument of the 
matrix verb, as well as the anchor, to which it is juxtaposed: 

Juxtaposition is different from modification (Mathews, 1981); there is modification in (54) for 
instance, but not in (47). Second, remember we argued in the headed relative clauses section 
that ordinary headed relative clauses introduced by QUEM can only occur in Brazilian 
Portuguese when QUEM is selected by a preposition: 

This kind of restriction does not seem to be affecting (47). Also, we have pointed out in the free 
relative clauses section that Brazilian Portuguese free relatives must always match; 
mismatching sentences are ruled out: 

As it is clear, the wh-sentence in (47) seems to be subject to the matching requirement; a 
matching sentence, (58)a, is okay; a mismatch, (58)b, rules the sentence out; deleting the 
preposition, (58)c, solves the mismatch problem and the sentence is okay again. 
 
A fourth argument is related to semantics: as described in free relative clauses, BP free relatives 
have maximalizing content, i.e., wh-phrases have universal meaning. (47) once again seems to 
fit this perfectly: 

All things set, one might conclude the wh-sentence in (47) is a free relative clause bearing 
appositive content, instead of an ordinary appositive (headed) relative clause. Do we mean by 
this that the wh-sentence in (47) is derived from a headed appositive relative clause? It does not 
seem to be the case. 

If a free relative in Brazilian Portuguese is really derived as the diagram in (46) proposes, it 
must be clear that the C head and the D head involved in the relativization process must be 
adjacent, otherwise one could not explain the head incorporation process reflected in the form 
of the wh-element “heading” those structures. 

One might consider the fact that the wh-word QUEM in (47) seems to correspond to the 
positions of the relativizer and the antecedent (the relativized nominal) altogether, as evidenced 
in (60) bellow: 

This being so, it becomes clear that the relativized nominal in (47) is not “Um fã teu”, but “uma 
pessoa”. This makes the relativizer in C and the antecedent DP to be adjacent, which enables 
the incorporation process described in (46) above11: 

Therefore, the conclusion is a free relative must be derived from a restrictive relative clause. 
This leads us to conclude that Emonds was partially correct in 1979 in saying that free relatives 
have no appositive counterpart. It is clear that free relatives must be derived via restrictive 
relatives, but the data in (1)/(47) show there can be appositive free relative clauses. How are 
those appositive free relative clauses characterized? 
 
1) They are derived from restricted relatives throughout a head incorporation process, which 
makes the anchor and the relativized to be different syntactic elements. 

2) They are juxtaposed and equivalent to the anchor. 

3) They can switch places with the anchor. 

4) They can be extraposed. 

In the present paper, I have tried to analyze some sort of “strange” quem-clauses in Brazilian 
Portuguese. I claim that these quem-clauses are not to be considered ordinary appositive relative 
clauses nor some sort of nominal appositive constructions, due to their syntactic behavior.  

One of the main arguments against considering the quem-sentences in (1) as containing an 
ordinary appositive relative is the possibility of eliding the anchor nominal in (1), but not in 
real appositive relative clauses (for the anchor in these sentences is the name been relativized. 
Also, I argued that in utterances as (1), the anchor and the appositive can switch places, contrary 
to what happens when an appositive relative is present. 

I have also tried to show that the quem-sentence in the data being put into analysis here seems 
to be juxtaposed to the anchor, contrary to what happens to ordinary appositive relative clauses, 
in which the anchor (the relativized nominal) is understood to be raised from within the 
subordinate clause (see Kayne, 1994). Another characteristic that these quem-sentences seem 
to have is that in (1) they can be extraposed, contrary to what happens to genuine appositive 
relatives. 

The main claim of the discussion presented here is that the quem-type sentences in question are 
free relative clauses with appositive content. If they are really free relatives in the terms 
proposed by Medeiros Junior (2014), as I am trying to argue, the antecedent D head and the 
relative CP head have been amalgamated through head incorporation. This means that the 
relativized nominal is not the anchor, but something else (the amalgamated DP); it would then 
explain the possibility of eliding the anchor in such constructions. 

The conclusion is that Brazilian Portuguese sentences, such as the ones highlighted here, 
evidence the existence of appositive free relatives. The subordinate wh-sentences in (1) are to 
be considered examples of this kind of occurrence. The prediction this claim makes is that the 
wh-sentence in (1) must be subject to matching requirements (see Marchesan, 2008; Medeiros 
Junior, 2005, 2014), which seems to be confirmed by the data analysis. Moreover, if those 
sentences are in fact free relatives, they must contain maximalizing interpretation, which in 
Brazilian Portuguese means having universal meaning (see Medeiros Junior, 2005, 2006; 2009, 
2014), a characteristic that also seems to be endorsed by data evaluation. 

These facts seem to weaken Emonds (1979) generalization on the impossibility of having a free 
relative with appositive content and makes such generalization partially wrong. Further details 
on the analysis implemented here are to be addressed in future investigation.  

I would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for both their careful reading of this paper and 
contributions and Ezekiel Panitz for his precious language review.  
