In Brazil, politicians at different levels cooperate to achieve electoral and governing goals. 
Recently, these relationships have come to be analyzed through theories of brokers developed 
in comparative politics. This article investigates the micro-foundations of alliances between 
state representatives and local politicians and asks to what extent those theories are adequate to 
analyze these relationships in Brazil. Our analysis combines data from surveys with state 
representatives and interviews with advisors and focuses on how alliances are built, maintained, 
and broken. We show that mayors and city councilors are important brokers for state 
representatives. However, the fact that legislators and local brokers do not hold static positions 
and play dual roles underscores the limits of principal-agent theories to describe and analyze 
these relationships. Based on our conclusions, we suggest pathways to advance our 
understanding of the dynamics of interest intermediation and the multilevel connections 
between political actors. 

In Brazilian politics, it is common for politicians located at different levels of the 
political system to cooperate among themselves to achieve objectives either in the electoral 
competition or in the governing arena. This cooperation can be seen in the alliances between 
legislators (state and federal) and mayors and councilors, which can be formal and restricted to 
the electoral period (the so-called dobradas1) or informal alliances that go beyond elections. In 
this relationship, local politicians are usually seen as brokers, a term used in the literature to 
designate actors who mediate between politicians and voters.2 

Several studies on the Brazilian case highlight the importance of the relationships 
between legislators and local politicians and the mediating role played by the latter (Bezerra, 
1999; Avelino, Biderman, and Barone, 2012; Barone, 2014; Novaes, 2018). The general idea 
is that representatives serve and allocate resources to their geographically concentrated bases, 
and, in exchange, local brokers channel votes for the legislators. These studies generally rely 
on assumptions about actors' motivations and the observable outcomes of alliances, without 
providing evidence of the mechanisms that underlie these relationships. In this paper, we 
examine to what extent the theoretical framework used to analyze relationships between brokers 
and bosses in comparative politics is adequate to explain the relationship between legislators 
and local politicians in Brazil. To this end, we investigate how these relationships are built, 
maintained, and eventually broken, confronting our findings with would be predicted by theory. 

To investigate these questions, we combined survey data with state representatives from 
twelve Brazilian states and evidence from in-depth interviews with state representatives' 
advisors. In this way, we sought to portray the relationships between state legislators and local 
brokers across a broad range of states and to identify the micro-foundations of these alliances 
and the mediation dynamics that characterize them. We do not intend to carry out a systematic 
test of hypotheses. Instead, this is an exploratory study, but one with the potential to reorient 
studies on the subject, insofar as it investigates the mechanisms underlying the relationships 
between legislators and brokers. Our main contribution is to point out theoretical and empirical 
pathways for this field of research. Our study also differs from the literature in another aspect. 

We shift our attention from federal legislators, the target of most investigations on the subject, 
to state representatives, stressing similarities and differences. 

In addition, our analysis draws attention to a different variety of brokers that is not 
highlighted in recent studies on the topic. Few studies in the recent comparative literature 
investigate the role that elective officeholders at the local level play as brokers (Stokes et al., 
2013; Camp, 2015) or explore in depth their peculiarities. In general, tend they focus on party 
activists (Stokes et el. 2013), activists driven by political, ethnic, or religious loyalties (Aspinall, 
2014), community leaders with or without party ties (Zarazaga, 2014; Holland & Palmer-Rubin, 
2015), and independent brokers hired to act exclusively in the election period (Muñoz, 2014).  

Our analysis supports the idea that local politicians, namely mayors and city councilors, 
play the role of brokers and are important points of support for state legislators. We also 
observed that, in general, financial resources and assistance in solving problems with state 
agencies are the most valued aids (Bezerra, 1999; Meireles, 2019), but that councilors and 
mayors differ in their demands and in how they are met. Fulfilling their requests is the primary 
way in which representatives nurture the alliances and, in this sense, legislators' actions and 
their offices are predominantly reactive.  

There are several ways to build partnerships, especially through friendships and 
geographical proximity. We show evidence that reputation is an essential element in the 
selection of brokers and that political parties matter more as potential veto points, depending 
on the configuration of local politics, than as criteria for structuring alliances. Our analysis also 
shows that the electoral payoff of partnerships for legislators is far from guaranteed. It involves 
many uncertainties and a significant effort to acquire information, negotiate, and establish 
priorities for assisting a local politician. Moreover, we concluded that electoral defeats are the 
main reasons for relationship break-ups and that representatives do not show a willingness to 
punish local brokers when they do not deliver what is expected. 

While we do not question the importance of local political actors as brokers for 
legislators, our findings reveal the limits of principal-agent theories — the theoretical 
framework most commonly used to study this topic (Stokes et al., 2013) — to describe these 
relationships in Brazil, especially when brokers hold elective office and play a dual role. We 
find no support for the assumptions that there is an inherent conflict of objectives between 
brokers and bosses, or an informational asymmetry in favor of the former regardless of the 
context.  

Based on our findings, we highlight the need to: (i) further explore the differences 
between local brokers who hold and do not hold elective mandates, and between state and 
national representatives in terms of local ties; (ii) differences and connections between the 
dynamics of intermediation occured during elections and those that go beyond the electoral 
campaigns; (iii) explore other methods of broker selection, besides parties (more commonly 
studied on the Brazilian case).  

Municipal and general (state/national) elections in Brazil take place alternately every 
two years: mayors and councilors are elected in 5,568 municipalities, and, two years later, it is 
the turn of state and national legislators, senators, governors, and the president of the Republic. 
While the executive heads at all levels are elected by a majoritarian system, legislators and 
councilors are elected by an open-list proportional system. In state and national elections, 
except for the presidential race, the electoral districts are the twenty-seven federation units. 
Even national representatives are elected in states, and their campaigns are organized at the 
state level.  

The 1988 Constitution established municipalities’ political and administrative 
autonomy, which increased the importance of local leaders, especially mayors. However, most 
Brazilian municipalities remain dependent on resource transfers from upper levels (Bremaeker, 
2018). Their infrastructural shortcomings induce mayors to cultivate relationships with 
congressmen as a way to ensure the flow of resources and benefits to their localities and, 
consequently, pave the way to electoral success.  

Several features of the Brazilian political system (such as the federative organization, 
electoral system, definition of electoral districts, separate elections, and concentration of 
resources at the central level) induce cooperation among local and state/national political actors, 
either in the period between elections or in the election period (Carneiro and Almeida, 2008). 
The literature in the electoral and legislative studies presents evidence that connections between 
local leaderships and representatives are an essential feature of Brazilian politics. 

Several studies have already shown that mayors to cultivate links with state and national 
representatives to allow them to carry out investments in infrastructure and public works 
projects, which are taken as one main indicator of a good administration at the local level 
(Palmeira and Goldman, 1996; Bezerra, 1999). Moreover, mayors can exhibit these connections 
as a distinctive sign before voters, a symbol of power and prestige they can convert into benefits 
for the municipality (Chaves, 1996; Bezerra, 1999; Eduardo, 2016). Much of the congressmen, 
in turn, would also be dependent on mayors to get credit for the delivered benefits, build a good 
reputation in their region and, consequently, win votes.  

Ames, Baker, and Rennó (2008) present evidence that voters, to a good extent, choose 
candidates for the national legislature with local concerns in mind, and prefer those with a 
recognized ability to allocate resources to their localities. The electoral results of this mutual 
support were also designated by Ames (1994) as “reverse coattails effects”.  

There is evidence that this cooperation brings electoral payoffs for both sides of the 
relationship. Avelino, Biderman, and Barone (2012) and Barone (2014) show that a victory in 
the mayoral election increases the parties' electoral chances for state and national offices. At 
the same time, Eduardo (2016) shows that an alliance with legislators increases the electoral 
chances of mayors, especially in small towns, and when voters believe that it will result in 
collective benefits for the municipality. 

One of the main ways representatives can benefit their localities and local politicians is 
by allocating resources through pork barrel budget amendments, following demands from 
mayors and other local actors3. A second way is by providing their allies with information and 
access to government agencies (especially the Executive branch) and supporting them in 
solving bureaucratic problems (Bezerra, 1999; Carvalho, 2003, p. 152). According to the 
legislators, the volume of resources allocated to municipalities is the main criterion used by 
local leaders to evaluate legislators’ performance (Bezerra, 1999). Bezerra (1999) reports that 
although representatives often express a negative view of the activities mentioned above, they 
justify the attention devoted to local affairs by the expectations of voters – an aspect 
corroborated by Ricci and Lemos (2011) based on surveys conducted with national 
representatives.  

Literature on the Brazilian case has emphasized the role of parties in structuring these 
relationships (Bezerra, 1999). They show evidence that these organizations play a relevant role 
in maximizing results in different electoral rounds at different federative levels and that a 
victory in the mayoral election raises the parties’ electoral chances in subsequent legislative 
elections (Fleischer, 2002; Carneiro and Almeida, 2008; Avelino, Biderman, and Barone, 2012; 
Novaes, 2018). In addition, there is evidence of party coordination in the budget resource 
allocation process that, in turn, would be crucial in the electoral arena (Baião and Couto, 2017; 
Meireles, 2019). 

Most studies that address the relationships between legislators and local leaders focus 
on national representatives. Some evidence of the local brokers’ importance for state 
representatives can be found in Castro, Anastasia, and Nunes (2009) and Melo (2011). Based 
on survey data from twelve Brazilian states, these authors show that many legislators value 
connections with local leaders and municipalities where they were well voted. They frequently 
visit localities, work to channel resources from budget amendments to the region, satisfy 
constituents' requests, and help mayors in their endeavors to solve problems with government 
agencies. They also show that a significant share of state legislators believe that the most critical 
factor for their reelection is their ability to send resources for their constituencies. 

Recently, scholars started to address the relationship between local politicians and 
legislators in Brazil through a theorical framework based on brokers (Eduardo, 2016; Novaes, 
2018). By adopting this framework, the literature establishes clear foundations, premises, and 
observable implications of these relationships and inserts the phenomenon into the comparative 
politics literature. In the next section, we present the general outlines of what brokers are and 
how these intermediation relationships work according to such theories, as well as question 
their application to the Brazilian case. 

In recent years, scholars of distributive politics and clientelism have turned their 
attention to brokers: people who mediate between politicians and parties on the one hand and 
voters and groups on the other. Brokers are seen as key actors to structure and maintain 
clientelist networks and, therefore, mobilize voters. According to some studies, their 
importance stems from their penetration in their communities, which gives them insider 
knowledge about voters' preferences. Therefore, they would be fundamental to define the best 
distribution strategies (what, who, when, how much to distribute) aiming at the highest electoral 
return (Stokes et al., 2013; Holland & Palmer-Rubin, 2015; Zarazaga, 2016; Szwarcberg, 2015; 
Aspinall, 2014; Novaes, 2018). 

Brokers are primarily unelected people who play some leadership role or has social or 
political capital that allows them to influence voters. However, they can also hold public office, 
usually at the local level. Their actions can extend beyond elections, when they take on a 
significant role in solving community problems (Auyero, 2001; Brierley and Nathan, 2021) and 
even in government tasks at the local level (Auyero, 2000; Zarazaga, 2014; Hoyler, Gelape, and 
Silotto, 2021).  

While part of the literature sees brokers as party agents embedded in large and dense 
networks typical of political machines (Stokes et al., 2013), others argue that a more diverse 
profile of brokers can be found in more fluid and poorly institutionalized party systems 
(Aspinall, 2014; Muñoz, 2014; Mares and Young, 2016). Brokers might be driven by political, 
ethnic, religious, or territorial loyalties, guided by long-term material benefits, seek more 
immediate material rewards (Aspinall, 2014), or they can also be focused on the interests of 
their groups (Holland and Palmer-Rubin, 2015). Moreover, brokers might not have any ties to 
parties and organizations and behave as free agents, switching allegiances in the same election 
(Muñoz, 2014, Aspinall, 2014; Novaes, 2018). 

With few exceptions (Auyero, 2000; Lawson and Greene, 2011; Finan and Schechter, 
2012), this literature does not tend to give importance to the role played by friendship and 
feelings of gratitude, reciprocity, and obligation in the dynamics of political brokerage. These 
can be mechanisms for creating or enforcing relationships and antidotes against opportunistic 
or predatory behavior. In many studies, these relationships are seen as a market transaction, 
guided by instrumental calculations (Brusco, Nazareno & Stokes, 2003; Stokes et al., 2013; 
Zarazaga, 2014; Camp, 2015). 

Principal-agent theories have been an important reference to analyze the relationships 
between brokers and bosses. Such theories are a common theoretical framework in Political 
Science, especially in works inspired by rational choice theory, to describe situations in which 
one actor – the principal – provides incentives for another actor – the agent(s) – to make 
decisions and pursue courses of action that are convergent with the principal’s goals and 
interests (Gailmard, 2012), given the premise that there is a conflict of purposes between them. 
Therefore, in order to minimize agency losses and discourage opportunistic behavior and the 
defection of brokers, principals distribute rewards and punishments in the form of promises of 
career advancement, positions in the public sector, advantages for local allies in recruiting 
candidates, financial resources at election time, among other private benefits (Camp, 2015; 
Novaes, 2018).  

An issue frequently addressed in these principal-agent analyses concerns the agent’s 
responsiveness to the principal’s objectives and how bosses select brokers and monitor their 
actions to ensure that they will act in their interests (Stokes et al., 2013; Aspinall, 2014; 
Gingerich, 2020; Holland and Palmer-Rubin, 2015). Many scholars assume that there is a 
disjunction between the interests of brokers and politicians/parties that presents risks for the 
latter concerning optimization and return on investment (Stokes et al., 2013). Thus, it is not 
enough for brokers to be recognized leaders in their communities. They also need to 
demonstrate the ability to mobilize voters. The principal, for its turn, needs to find observable 
indicators to guide and monitor brokers’ performance. Some of the indicators used by bosses 
are the number of votes delivered by brokers (Szwarcberg, 2012; Gingerich, 2020), attendance 
at campaign events (Szwarcberg, 2012; Muñoz, 2014), and the size of the networks brokers can 
build (Stokes et al., 2013). 

The relationship between these participants is maintained as long as they are mutually 
beneficial. Some authors argue that the risk of brokers’ disloyalty is higher in contexts of non-
dominant clientelist parties in which none of them has exclusive access to state resources 
(Muñoz, 2014; Novaes, 2018). According to Aspinall (2014), in such a scenario, the chances 
of defection and predatory behavior increase as brokers seeking short-term material rewards 
predominate in the network. Other factors explaining brokers’ loyalty are the volume of 
candidates’ resources and their prospects for victory (Aspinall, 2014), levels of party 
identification among voters, and the existence of programmatic linkages between brokers and 
bosses (Novaes, 2018). 

Turning our attention to studies on distributive politics in Brazil, we find evidence that: 
(i) voters incorporate local concerns in their voting decision which inclines them to choose 
legislators with a reputation for bringing resources to the municipality; (ii) a significant share 
of legislators strive to allocate resources and provide services to municipalities; (iii) local 
leaders, especially mayors, perform a significant role in winning votes for legislators; and (iv) 
allocating resources to municipalities brings electoral returns for both legislators and mayors. 

However, the theories of brokers based on principal-agent models do not seem entirely 
suitable to describe brokerage relationships in which both parties hold an elected office and 
look for votes. The rigid assumptions they adopt – notably the existence conflicting goals 
between principal and agent (Gailmard, 2012) and informational asymmetry in favor of the 
latter – are not always valid for describing the relationship between Brazilian legislators and 
their local brokers. As we seek to show in the following sections, these relationships can take 
different forms, and there is no single possible equilibrium. 

Unlike most studies on brokerage between officeholders in Brazil, which rely on 
quantitative analyses, we employ a multi-method approach in this paper. We integrate 
quantitative and qualitative descriptive evidence to answer the following questions: how are 
relationships between state representatives and local politicians constructed, maintained, and 
ended? Do the principal-agent models that inform much of the analysis in comparative politics 
provide an appropriate framework to describe and analyze these relationships in the Brazilian 
case?  

To identify broader trends in the relationships between state legislators and their 
brokers, we use data from the two waves of a survey undertaken by the Center for Legislative 
Studies (CEL/DCP/UFMG) in twelve Brazilian states4 with 513 state representatives in 2007 
and 439 in 20125. This data helps us reflect on what to expect from qualitative evidence. 
Although not nationwide (not generalizable to the whole country), it allows us to draw a broader 
picture for Brazil. In addition, we conducted ten in-depth interviews with chiefs of staff and 
advisors of nine state legislators from a single state. The interviews provide new evidence to 
the same research questions highlighted at the beginning of this section and which are also 
answered using quantitative data.  

Rather than deriving assumptions about the actors’ motivations and the alliances’ 
expected outcome from theory, the interviews gives us a more comprehensive view of these 
processes and its unfolding over time. They enable us to identify the elements that underlie the 
quantitative evidence in the literature and illustrate their operating mechanisms (Martin, 2013). 
These elements refer to the perceptions and motivations of actors directly involved in 
constructing these alliances, which are hardly captured through surveys. Thus, to the extent that 
the interviews provide a more detailed description of how actors make choices, act, and react 
in their mutual relations, they can contribute to generating hypotheses and/or propose causal 
mechanisms (Martin, 2013; Kapiszewski, MacLean, and Read, 2015). 

One of the difficulties of interviewing method is related to the construction of the sample 
of interviewees and the resulting bias (Martin, 2013). Given that this stage’s goal was to 
investigate the dynamics of building and maintaining these alliances, in our sample, we sought 
state legislators whose teams could contribute to find incidences of this phenomenon. We chose 
representatives (elected for the 2015-2018 legislature) who had at least 30% of their votes 
concentrated in a given region, given the assumption that legislators with more concentrated 
votes tend to present a more particularistic behavior (Carvalho, 2003). Supposing these 
representatives would tend to lean more on local brokers, we expected to maximize the 
likelihood of accessing accounts of these relationships.  

Nine legislators6  from the chosen state region7 met the above requirement. Six had been 
re-elected in 2018 for the 2019-2022 term, and three could not get re-elected. Given the 
impossibility of conducting interviews with advisors of two legislators, we replaced these cases 
with two legislators who had at least 20% of their votes concentrated in the region. A total of 
ten interviews were conducted, with nine chiefs of staff and one adviser of nine different state 
representatives.8 We chose to interview advisors and not the legislators based on the assumption 
that they would be more accessible and have a broader view of the mandate. From the ten 
advisors interviewed, only one worked in the regional office.  

The interviews revealed that mayors (prefeitos), local councilors (vereadores), former 
mayors, and former councilors, i.e., people holding or having held office, are the most valuable 
brokers for state legislators. The survey corroborates this result. When asked about relevant 
support for their electoral victory, the region’s mayors are the second most important category 
in both waves of the state legislators survey. If we add up the first and second most relevant 
support, at least 30% of the interviewees in both waves of the survey said that the support of 
“mayors from their region” was one of the top two most important ones (36.5% in 2007 and 
30.3% in 2012). This result converges with other studies that highlight the importance of 
mayors as local brokers (Mares and Young, 2016, Gingerich, 2020). 

Our evidence also points out that city councilors are relevant supports, albeit less than 
mayors. Almost 24% of respondents in the 2007 wave said that support from local councilors 
was important to their victory (5.7% in the first, 18.3% in the second), and just over 18% did 
so in the 2012 wave (4.3% in the first, 14.1% in the second). In the aggregate, 50.3% of 
respondents in 2007 mentioned mayors or councilors as one of the two most important 
endorsements. This figure was lower in the 2012 wave, 40.1%.9 

Considering the aggregate of representatives who cited mayors and/or city councilors 
as one of the most important supports for their election, there is some variation between states 
(Appendix B)10. In both waves, they are most cited in Bahia, Pernambuco, and Tocantins, and 
least cited in Mato Grosso, Rio Grande do Sul, and Rio de Janeiro. Thus, despite the difference 
in their size, the pattern’s stability between them is striking. Regarding parties (those with 10 
or more members who were interviewed), in both waves the PT has a lower than average 
proportion of mentions to mayors and/or councilors, while DEM, PMDB, PP and PSDB have 
a higher than average proportion (Appendix B). 

However, in both waves, the category that appeared in first place in legislators’ answers 
as the most important for their victory involved community leaders11. This result contrasts with 
the in-depth interviews, in which current and former elected officials (mayors and councilors) 
received much more prominence than other types of leaders. This contrast is probably due to 
the difference in profile between the survey sample (with representatives with different profiles 
and spatial patterns of votes) and the interview sample, which focused on legislators with more 
concentrated votes.  

An interesting element from the interviews and often overlooked by the literature is that 
“support from the municipality” is often not synonymous with “support from the mayor”. 
Advisors refer to these supports as “representatives’ municipalities” (municípios do deputado) 
or “our municipalities” (nossos municípios). Nevertheless, what defines whether or not a 
municipality is “the legislator’s” is an aligned mayor or the support of a political leader, most 
often city councilors, former mayors, former councilors, people who have run or intend to run 
in the future. In other words, a legislator may include a municipality in her sphere of influence 
without necessarily having the mayor’s support. 

Advisors call their work on municipalities and with local leaders as “political affairs” 
(“trabalho político”), in contrast with other activities. All interviewees estimated the number of 
allied municipalities, and almost all of them showed us spreadsheets with the legislator's 
municipalities’ list. Each spreadsheet was organized differently, but, in general, they contained 
the municipalities’ names, number of votes given to the state legislator in the last election, and 
the reference broker’s name (which could be the mayor, a councilor, a former mayor, a former 
councilor, or, more rarely, a community leader).  

Except for one, all interviewees affirmed that the mayor’s support was important in the 
legislator’s last election. For most of them, mayors’ importance as brokers stems from their 
visibility in the municipality, their political power, and their capacity to execute (as opposed to 
councilors, for example). To a large extent, mayors perform the role of gatekeepers, and their 
endorsement is important, sometimes necessary, for representatives to enter the municipalities, 
a finding that converges with those of Bezerra (1999) in his investigation on national 
representatives. 

For most legislators, it is very important [the mayor's support]. Let's suppose 
that you are the mayor of [municipality], then I go there alone and ask for a 
vote: nobody knows me. People from the interior trust the mayors, the 
councilors, the leaders who talk about the legislator (Chief of Staff 2). 

In two interviews, the lower importance of mayors was attributed, among other factors, 
to the legislator’s relatively short career in the State Assembly (only two terms). On the other 
hand, there were two cases of representatives inheriting political capital – including support of 
mayors – from their parents who had previously been legislators. In addition, as already 
suggested by Novaes (2018), we found evidence that representatives who are in the opposition 
find it more challenging to keep their network of supporters due to a weaker access to patronage 
resources. When asked about the number of local brokers, an advisor from an opposition party 
said: 

More or less 40 mayors and about 60 councilors and leaders. We used to have 
more. In the first term, we had up to 70, 80 mayors. Until the end of last year, 
we supported the governor, so we had a much greater access to state 
government resources (Advisor 1). 

In some cases, legislators mix a regional approach, which is highly dependent on mayors 
and municipal leaders, with thematic activity or working with a specific sector. In the latter 
case, interviewees tended to give less importance to regional activities as well as to mayors as 
brokers. One of evidence from this lesser importance comes from a legislator who is active in 
defending a group’s interests: she does not keep a regional office, and only has one paid 
assistant in her hometown. 

The interviews show that it is possible to distinguish between two types of legislators. 
One is the policy-oriented, who devote more time and energy to lawmaking and institutional 
activities. The other prefers constituency service and attribute a great value to municipalities 
and local leaders, or, in terms of the interviewees, to the “political affairs”. 

It is worthwhile to note the only interviewee who did not attribute importance to the 
support of mayors for the legislator’s election: a second-term representative who focuses her 
activities on a specific policy area. This legislator most important relationships at the local level 
involve other actors, such as bureaucrats with managerial positions, NGO presidents, and 
entities that work in this same policy area. Her adviser also stated that their office uses social 
media intensely to publicize the legislator’s actions, suggesting a deliberate effort to relieve or 
downplay the role of local politicians as mediators and establish a more direct relationship with 
voters.  

It was surprising to note the importance attributed to city councilors both in the 
interviews and on the survey, given the little attention the literature gives to relations city 
councilors with actors outside the local arena. In our interviews, advisors emphasized the 
importance of councilors, especially in municipalities where a legislator “does not have the 
mayor”, and councilors can work towards winning (or recovering) the local Executive.  

The legislator is very hierarchical; she has always thought that the councilor 
has to take her demands to the mayor, and the mayor has to bring them here. 
(…) But it doesn't mean, right, (...), that we don't assist the councilor. We do it 
a lot when the mayor is not ours. When the mayor is ours, it’s unjustifiable to 
receive her here because it’s like she’s going over the head of the executive 
branch there (Chief of Staff 4). 

We noticed a perception that demands from councilors are more diversified than 
mayoral ones, which, for the most part, ask for financial resources. Mayors tend to be associated 
with requests of a more general nature (although it is not uncommon for them to seek help in 
favor of groups and individuals). In contrast, councilors tend to act predominantly on behalf of 
individuals and social organizations (which they call “entidades”).  

In non-election years, councilors mediate the allocation of resources to social 
organizations. Since this type of operation does not need to go through the mayor’s office, they 
are essential in municipalities where the representative “does not have the mayor”, and the 
councilor can exercise the mediation independently. When a councilor resorts to the 
representatives for a more collective nature request, some articulation with the Executive 
becomes necessary, since they are responsible for the execution. In these cases, there may be a 
credit dispute, and a positive outcome depends on the mayor’s goodwill. Nevertheless, most of 
the time, interviewees stated that this transaction occurs without major setbacks. After all, it is 
costly for mayors to decline resources and benefits for the municipality even when these come 
from the hands of an opposittion councilor or political group.  

We see, therefore, that brokers who hold elected offices are key supporters of state 
representatives. Most recent studies on brokers do not explore the distinction between elected 
and non-elected mediators. Hence, it is not clear to what extent their propositions and 
conclusions apply equally to those who hold and those who do not hold elective mandates.  

Moreover, as we have already pointed out, these studies tend to rely on the assumptions 
of principal-agent models. In order to apply this framework, one should clearly identify who 
performs the role of principal and who performs the role of agent (Gailmard, 2012, p. 4). Our 
analysis shows that state representatives and brokers do not occupy static positions and move 
around in time and space, playing a dual role. As the boss, a legislator is the leading actor who 
expects local actors to act in favor of her electoral success. To encourage brokers, she provides 
incentives, such as assigning discretionary budget resources to municipalities and fulfilling 
mayors’ and councilors’ requests. In this position, she is subject to the risks inherent to this 
relationship. However, since mayors and councilors are also politicians with elective offices, a 
shift in time converts legislators from principals to agents, ready to mobilize voters in municipal 
elections. Another distinctive aspect of this relationship, not captured in most analyses, is that 
representatives need to mobilize voters to ensure the political survival of those who once acted 
as their brokers. In other words, the role of principal or agent is defined by the function 
exercised in this relationship, which varies in time and space and cannot necessarily be inferred 
by the position occupied in the country’s elected-offices structure. 

In the previous section, we showed that mayors and local councilors are important 
brokers for state representatives and that, among other things, these relationships imply that 
legislators allocate resources to municipalities. This section explores how these alliances are 
established and how brokers are selected.  

First, our evidence contests the idea that friendship and feelings of reciprocity are not 
important in relationships between legislators and local brokers. In the 2007 and 2012 waves 
of the survey, legislators’ answers do not point to the predominance of one single factor to 
explain how they were able to get mayors’ and councilors’ support: personal and family 
relations stand out (25.6% as the main factor in 2007, and 32.4% in 2012), carrying out public 
works in the locality (26.7% in 2007) or channeling resources for the region (15.3% in 2012), 
party relations (14% and 21%, respectively) or supporting the campaign of mayors and 
councilors (11.6% and 15.3%). Thus, while the focus of recent literature has been on party 
relations, the scenario shown by the survey is more diverse.  

In the interviews, in turn, reference to friendship ties was frequent. Friend’s networks 
seem to be important as a source of information, to start new relationships, to obtain donations 
for the campaign, but mainly as a stockpile of trust for cases in which one of the parties cannot 
deliver what is expected by her partner.  

Nowadays, mayors and councilors always want resources for the municipality 
in a way that is a bit of a negotiation. They only commit to the legislator when 
she provides resources (...) We select carefully (...), we avoid this kind of 
person because we see that it is not going to be a lasting relationship. The 
[legislator] has this characteristic of bringing people together, those who are 
affiliated to the [party], those who have sympathy for the [party], and even for 
friendship (Advisor 1). 

In discussing relations between representatives and local actors, scholars commonly ask 
to what extent party affinities structure alliances. In other words, the question is to what extent 
alliances occur primarily between co-partisans or involve any party coordination, so that 
brokers become party agents and alliances yield votes for the organization’s politicians. As 
mentioned before, the Brazilian case shows evidence of partisan brokerage (Baião and Couto, 
2017; Avelino, Biderman, Barone, 2012; Barone, 2014; Bezerra, 1999; Meireles, 2019). 
However, the comparative literature shows that this is not the rule (Muñoz, 2014; Novaes, 
2018), and that it is possible to find other types of brokers with no links to political parties 
(Holland and Palmer-Rubin, 2015).  

Notwithstanding the low levels of party identification and the personalization associated 
with it’s open-list proportional representation, it is unlikely that parties do not play an important 
role in the Brazilian electoral process. After all, political parties remain the exclusive channel 
for running for a public office, and control vital resources in the electoral process – funding, 
political advertising time on television and radio, and other organizational resources. Moreover, 
it is natural that studies should focus on party labels, since it’s an easily available variable.  

However, our evidence suggests that political parties may not be the only element 
structuring alliances, nor even the major. Thus, we refocus our efforts not in understanding 
whether party affinities matter, but under what conditions they lose in importance to other 
factors (which are less trivial to measure, but count when choosing partners and forming 
alliances). In the in-depth interviews, chiefs of staff were unanimous in stressing the little or no 
importance of political parties in building local alliances. In general, they tended to say that the 
representatives have alliances with leaders of various parties and that affiliation is not the most 
crucial criterion. One could object that this is due to the profile of the legislators we focused on 
in our interviews (votes concentrated in adjacent municipalities). But, even in the survey 
conducted with a wider range of legislators, only a minority (14% and 21% of the interviewees, 
in 2007 and 2012, respectively) pointed out party relations as the most important reason for 
obtaining mayors’ and councilors’ support.  

We argue, therefore, that the party is not the main factor to structure brokerage 
networks, but it is one (among others) that puts them in motion. Moreover, the interviews 
suggest that political parties can work as veto points, depending on the municipality’s political 
configuration. Political groups’ strength in the local arena and their degree of polarization can 
convert parties into elements that hinders or prevents alliances between local politicians and 
legislators. 

Among the interviewees, the selection of brokers seems to follow a more regional 
criterion and may occur through different paths and in a very informal way. In the case of 
mayors, for example, an alliance can start with the mayor’s initiative to reach out to a legislator, 
making a request and proposing a partnership. This occurs, for example, with “orphan mayors” 
who are “without a legislator” (“sem deputado”) due to a broken relationship or because the 
candidate who the mayor supported failed to get elected. Mayors from the same region and 
adjacent municipalities speak to each other: a mayor recommends a legislator to another, or an 
orphan mayor seeks information with a mayor from a neighboring municipality. Some 
interviewees said that when a new mayor approaches them, they seek information about her, 
sometimes from their former allies, which shows the importance of reputation in building 
alliances and suggests a kind of ex-ante control at the early stages of a relationship. 

In politics, we know everything: the most correct person, the most dedicated, 
who really works, who doesn't work. What if she loses? Or if she can't run for 
office? So it never stops, we have to do the serious work right after the election 
(Chief of Staff 9). 

Our interviews suggest that offices can work to serve those who have cast votes and 
shown loyalty in the past, as well as those who may deliver votes in the future. A legislator may 
use this forward-looking strategy when she intends to expand her influence to other regions. 
Although this is not the rule, a representative may take the initiative to gain a new ally by 
allocating resources to a locality without the mayor's request and without her committment to 
support the representative. The chief of staff and other advisors also work to attract new allies, 
using their professional or personal connections to link the representative to mayors and local 
political groups. 

Selecting brokers and maintaining relationships seems to be a diverse and dynamic 
process. Our interviews suggest at least three distinct dynamics. Some historical partners remain 
loyal for a long time due to past collaborative work and personal affinities. In these cases, 
partnerships may endure even when the legislator feels disappointed with the number of votes 
cast in the municipality or when the mayor’s requests have not been fully met. There are short-
lived, circumstantial partnerships that end up being broken because one side feels disappointed 
by the partner’s lack of commitment or because some shift in the local political context. The 
absence of other strong ties – regional, friendship, affinity, shared past experiences – makes it 
less costly for both parts to break this relationship and search for new allies. The short-term 
evaluation of fulfilled requests and delivered votes weigh in this case. Finally, there are 
uncertain partners, a mayor or local councilor who has received a benefit but about whom the 
legislator does not feel secure about. These are alliances that advisors tend not to include in 
their accounting of expected votes. They enter as “extras” that may or may not materialize. 

This is a very important municipality for us. The mayor is not 100% ours. She 
is in her second term, and she is going to support a great leader of the 
municipality who is from her group, very dear to the town. She is not even 
affiliated with [the legislator's party], but she is already committed to [the 
legislator]. One year in advance we start planning for the following year. Of 
course, everything can change during the elections, but we are betting on it and 
allocating resources to it. The mayor, being a good friend of her’s and ours’, 
although already committed to another legislator, opened the doors of the 
municipality (Councilor 1). 

The last line expresses the uncertain nature of some alliances and the fact that legislators 
are often making a risky bet, an aspect also registered by Bezerra (1999). Therefore, our 
evidence suggests that partnerships between representatives and local brokers may suffer from 
adverse selection problems similar to those that characterize principal-agent relationships. The 
participants’ information gathering, learning, and reputation are essential elements guiding the 
choice of partners (Gingerich, 2020). However, it is not only those who play the role of bosses 
who are subject to these risks. Local brokers also take the initiative to form partnerships and 
seek information to increase the odds of a fruitful alliance. 

Once the broker is selected, and the link is established, how do the participants act to 
preserve it? How do requests and deliveries occur in practice? Are state representatives able to 
evaluate brokers’ performances? Does this evaluation effectively influence the decision of 
whom to serve and how?  

Our interviews suggest that the relationship between state legislators and mayors does 
not take the form of a top-down process in which bosses decide what, how, and to whom to 
offer benefits. This is because local brokers also play an active role in this relationship. 
Although occasionally the legislators’ office plays an active role in offering benefits, the 
requests coming from the municipalities predominate. They come in large volumes throughout 
the year, in line with evidence from Bezerra (1999). 

Among the interviewees’ legislators’ offices, most are organized, among other 
objectives, to assist the municipalities. In all of them, there is an internal division of labor and 
an effort to balance the “technical” and “political” parts of the staff. On the “political side” (as 
the advisors call it), priority is given to people linked to local communities, who have 
connections to mayors, local leaders, and social groups; people who have served the legislators 
for a long time, who worked in the last electoral campaign, and who have access to Executive 
agencies. On the “technical” side, they value essential skills in office management (secretariat, 
communication, legal advising, legislative process) as well as expertise and experience in key 
policy areas, such as health and education. 

All interviewees stated that the legislator keeps a regional office and/or advisors 
working in one or more municipalities of reference for her. The number of employees in the 
offices is close to 20, with a minority (1 to 4) working at the regional office. In one case, almost 
half of the staff (9) worked in the region and would become part of the office that was about to 
be set up. These regional advisors’ functions are to identify the demands, "mitigating the 
absence of the legislator in the region", "bringing to us the reality of a citizen", being "our voices 
and ears in the region" (Chief of Staff 4).  

We note that only a minority of the staff members worked at the ground level – contrary 
to what Carvalho (2003) identified for national representatives. This is probably because state 
assemblies are closer to the non-capital municipalities. Moreover, since a large part of local 
requests is related to bureaucratic procedures involving Executive branch agencies, it seems 
more appropriate to keep most of the staff at the headquarters, where they have easier access to 
these structures. 

Legislators with a profile linked to assisting municipalities (municipalista) usually 
follow this process to meet demands: mayors, city councilors, and other local leaders (especially 
former mayors and councilors) present the requests. Then the office is mobilized to meet those 
within the resources and options available. 

So, the mayors bring their requests to the legislator, sometimes to help with 
some knotty [“agarrado”] project, and then we help them with the arguments. 
The mayors have quite a hard time with this, and we, who are prepared, sit 
down, orient, and help them. We get the document, take it, file it, proceed... 
(Chief of Staff 2). 

Both survey waves show that one of their more frequent activities is to “deal with the 
government agencies to meet the requests of mayors in their region”. Among those who listed 
mayors or councilors as one of their two main supports, 71.7% of those interviewed in 2007 
said they often carried out this activity. This percentage was even higher in 2012: 73.3% of the 
surveyed. 

The interviews present a strong evidence that offices allocate much time, energy, and 
personnel to assist municipalities and civic organizations (referred to as “entities”) so they can 
meet the administrative requirements for accessing resources from upper levels of government. 
These actions show the informational role that state legislators’ offices exercise for mayors and 
local leaders. Through these activities, legislators’ offices try to mitigate municipalities’ 
deficiencies in terms of human resources and technical expertise to deal with complex issues 
related to legal requirements. 

Regarding budget amendments, legislators’ offices usually organize spreadsheets 
containing all the requests, detailed by object (public work, equipment, vehicle purchase, and 
the like.), amount, municipality, and the broker who mediated and presented the request. Before 
legislators officially assign an amendment to a locality, the office usually contacts the requesters 
to inform them what can be done. Since it is impossible to fulfill all requests most of the time, 
mayors and councilors have to decide what they want to prioritize. For most interviewees, 
especially those who define the legislator as a “municipalist”, there is no doubt that the budget 
amendments are the resources most valued by mayors. 

The representative, since she is a municipalist legislator who does not go to the 
floor [of the state assembly] and rail everybody, who stands for the union, 
stands for education... The budget amendments are no doubt our flagship. It is 
amendments what every leader, every mayor expects (Chief of Staff 9). 

In both waves of the survey, allocating amendments was the third most valued 
parliamentary activity (among five categories) – 16.0% in the first wave and 18.2% in the 
second – behind lawmaking and solving state problems. Thus, it is not insignificant, but it does 
not figure in the first position either. These answers may suffer from a social desirability bias. 
Still, it is worth noting that amendments may be central to the relationship between legislators 
and their local brokers but not necessarily to their performance as state representatives. 
Moreover, the bias of our sample of interviewees among “municipalists” may strengthen the 
relevance of pork barrel for these legislators.  

Although interviewees reported a wide variety of sources of requests, it is clear that 
these gain more attention from the office when channeled by a local broker. Concerning 
requests from individuals, groups, and civil organizations mediated by the councilors, one 
interviewee stated: 

He [the person] addresses this request to the councilor, and the councilor takes 
this mail and delivers it to us. So it is a request from the person but directed by 
the councilor. We receive a lot of letters, emails, WhatsApp; the mayor gives 
them our WhatsApp, and they send us lots of messages. Nowadays WhatsApp 
doesn't stop (Chief of Staff 8). 

Our interviews suggest a more reactive behavior of state legislators, similar to what 
Nichter (2018) showed regarding the relationship between politicians and voters. According to 
him, politicians often react to voter requests by solving their demands. But, it is important to 
note that representatives can also be proactive. One of the interviewees, for example, stated that 
there are “many things that the state provides” and mayors are not aware. In this case, the office 
mediates to deliver a benefit to the municipality, a dynamic also highlighted by Bezerra (1999, 
p. 121).  

Given the high number of requests they receive from municipalities, how do the offices 
establish priorities? The interviews suggest that legislators balance two criteria: a need to favor 
the largest number of local partners and ensure that resources are tangible for the population 
and enough to carry out public works. The most vital is to ensure that the benefit has impact 
and visibility, which requires a greater volume of resources the larger a city is. In larger cities, 
according to one interviewee, “it will be very scattered” or, as another one put it, it may become 
grounds for criticism (allocating too few resources to a large city).  

Almost all interviewees admitted that they favor municipalities where they performed 
better (because they had a significant number of votes or ended up the most voted state 
representative), or where they have high expectations of electoral returns (although other 
factors, such as loyalty, may result in exceptions). One interviewee stated that after listing all 
the demands from mayors, she proceeds as follows: 

I surveyed all municipalities that had votes, regardless of whether it was the 
opposition or the incumbent. Then I presented to the representative the 
localities where she had the most votes, where she was the first most voted, the 
second... (Chief of Staff 6). 

Another way to deal with an imbalance between the volume of requests and available 
resources is to consider other sources of aid to the municipality. Representatives consider, for 
example, the fact that some organizations, such as Apaes and Santa Casas, receive resources 
from several representatives. They can also refer the mayor (or other local leaders) to other 
legislators, concentrating their resources where their prospects for electoral returns are greater 
and less uncertain. 

Normally here in the assembly you know the legislators that serve by region. 
So let’s suppose that we receive a request from a person who lives in 
[municipality]... then there is a little book that you look at the region and 
suggest the person look for that representative. Some things are possible, we 
have already helped people here who are not from our region (...). It’s just that 
we don't open a wide range because we can’t handle it, the demand is too large 
(Chief of Staff 8). 

According to the interviewees, state representatives usually collaborate with national 
representatives. Most of the time, these partnerships are with members of different parties but 
from the same region. There seems to be a division of labor that pays off for all actors involved. 
While the national legislator can allocate greater financial resources to municipalities through 
budget amendments, the state representative has closer contacts with the region and voters, as 
reported in the interviews. In one of the cases included in our sample, there seemed to be almost 
a fusion between the state legislator and her national partner’s office. In this case, they were 
fellow party members. 

The interviewees tended to downplay the elections’ period importance to establishing 
relationships with local brokers. They tended to say that the work on municipalities, local 
groups, and voters is done over the years and that use elections for publicizing actions and 
channeled benefits. Despite this, one cannot to deny the impacts caused by the electoral cycle 
on the dynamics of these relationships. For example, representatives cannot channel 
amendments directly to civil organizations during election years. Furthermore, an amendment 
approved in a year may be executed in the following year, when neither the author of the 
amendment nor the allied mayor who demanded it may be in office anymore. 

It is, therefore, necessary to distinguish between the dynamics of mediation in the 
election period and the period between elections. Much of the studies on brokers (Szwarcberg, 
2012; Munoz, 2014; Aspinall, 2014; Gingerich, 2020) focus on the electoral moment and 
generalize their findings to the entire term of office. Thus, they tend to overestimate elements 
present in the election period and neglect dynamics that extend beyond that moment. The 
assumption that politicians orient their actions toward electoral success is reasonable, but this 
does not mean that all brokerage dynamics are reducible to the logic of campaigns or that they 
cannot assume different political meanings.  

We did not restrict our analysis to the electoral period, and, like other scholars, we try 
to highlight the importance of non-electoral tasks performed by brokers (Auyero, 2000; 
Zarazaga, 2014; Hoyler, Gelape, and Silotto, 2021). They involve carrying out public works, 
implementing public policies, communicating local demands to the state government, and 
solving voters’ individual and collective problems. In other words, brokers play a role in 
producing political outcomes other than votes. 

The analysis of these brokerage relationships seems to offer little support for another 
important premise of principal-agent models: informational asymmetry in favor of the agent. 
Several studies on brokers assume that brokers have insider information relative to bosses and 
strategically use this advantage to extract more resources (Stokes et al., 2013; Camp, Dixit and 
Stokes, 2014; Keefer and Vlaicu, 2007; Novaes, 2018).   

Indeed, mayors and councilors play an important informational role for state legislators. 
Our interviews suggest that representatives allocate resources based on demands from 
municipalities and that they consult with mayors and councilors in different negotiations around 
budget amendments. Legislators rely on brokers to know which benefits will be valued by the 
local population, and adjust the available resources to this information. Without brokers’ 
support, legislators would face more obstacles in representing their constituents and influencing 
public policies. 

On the other hand, as our analysis has shown, legislators are also important 
informational actors for local brokers. A significant part of what their offices offer for allies is 
information that depends on their expertise and differentiated access to state executive agencies, 
something not available for many municipalities’ leaders. Therefore, there is mutual 
dependence on information valued by each agent in this transaction. This interpretation 
converges with the findings of one of the most extensive studies on brokers ever conducted. 
Brierley and Nathan (2021), studying the selection of brokers in Ghana, found no evidence 
supporting the “information asymmetry model” (2021:1). According to the authors, rather than 
downward ties to ordinary voters or detailed information about them, what mattered in selecting 
brokers was their upward ties and personal connections with members of party elites. Brokers 
with better upward ties are brokers with more knowledge and access to government agencies 
that concentrate the resources voters need. 

As we have already stated, the literature on electoral mobilization via brokers highlights 
different indicators and metrics used by voters, candidates, politicians, and brokers to assess 
and monitor participants’ behavior in mediation dynamics. On the one hand, the literature’s 
assumption and the previous section’s evidence suggest that alliances between local leaders and 
state representatives can benefit both sides. On the other hand, analyses inspired by principal-
agent theories emphasize the importance of monitoring brokers and providing them private 
rewards (Camp, 2015) to minimize agency losses. For these analyses, it would be essential to 
ensure that parties can estimate when it is worth maintaining or breaking off the relationship 
and how much energy, time, and resources to allocate. In our case, how do state representatives 
evaluate the results of partnerships with local leaders and the prospects for electoral returns? 

Although most interviewees have no doubts about the importance of these alliances, 
they tend to portray them as uncertain and subject to many disappointments. According to them, 
it is common for mayors to deliver far fewer votes than promised by the mayor and/or expected 
by the legislator. When this happens, the alliance is not necessarily broken or shaken, and other 
factors such as loyalty, strength of the bond, and previous work together play an important role 
in the renewal of trust. 

The literature has already documented the uncertain nature of these partnerships in 
Brazil and other cases (Bezerra, 1999; Aspinall, 2014; Novaes, 2018). Nevertheless, unlike this 
evidence, our interviewees expressed less frequently their disappointment with mayors or other 
local brokers in terms of betrayal or opportunistic and predatory behavior. When questioned in 
these terms, interviewees showed empathy regarding the pressures mayors deal with.  

Some mayors attribute “the [eventual] switch of sides” to changes in local politics’ 
dynamics or changes in parties’ electoral strategy. Regarding the issue of exclusivity, our 
interviews revealed contrasting perspectives. One interviewee considers that it is most 
appropriate for mayors to remain loyal to a single state legislator. However, others admit that 
diversifying is an option, especially when the allied legislator opposes the state governor and 
has less access to resources – a similar dynamic was identified by Bezerra (1999).  

Efforts to monitor the behavior of local brokers include some systematic procedures 
such as spreadsheets with information about them, number of votes delivered, and expectations 
for the next election. Except for one, all legislators’ offices kept some version of this 
spreadsheet. This kind of practice aligns with the idea that politicians draw on election cycles 
to learn about brokers’ abilities (Gingerich, 2020). Nevertheless, our interviews also revealed 
more informal ways of monitoring. They are all based on gathering information concerning 
broker’s efforts, what she has done or is doing, but keeping in mind what it is in her power to 
accomplish.  

Communication between office staff seems to be an important source of information for 
state representatives. This is how, for example, an advisor gets to know if an allied or soliciting 
mayor has also been requesting help and pledging votes in other offices. The legislator’s local 
networks and visits to the municipality are also important to estimate how much mayors have 
dedicated themselves to mobilizing voters during the campaign. In addition, mayors’ invitations 
to attend the inauguration of public works and other events are also signs that she is committed 
to promoting the representative in her city. Therefore, monitoring takes place through different 
strategies that make it possible to distinguish brokers and thus calibrate the resource distribution 
to different localities. As other studies have pointed out (Szwarcberg, 2015; Gingerich, 2020), 
our evidence shows the importance of learning in selecting brokers and updating expectations 
about them.  

Analyzing partnerships between representatives and mayors, Samuels (2002) stressed 
the risk of credit capture by mayors who are responsible for implementing the amendments 
directed to municipalities. In order to minimize this problem representatives could prioritize 
amendments for municipalities administered by fellow party members (Baião and Couto, 2017) 
or create alternative direct communication channels with the population. 

Our interviews suggest that representatives may be less reliant on mayors to claim credit 
for benefits than the literature supposes. First, as noted above, the credit claiming can be made 
through a city councilor, former mayor, or another local support (someone from their “political 
group”). Second, the legislators’ offices work to give visibility to their actions. Thus, mayors 
would have little room to “credit capture”. Moreover, according to the interviewees, the 
growing use of social media expands the opportunities for voters to obtain information 
independently and for the representative’s office to communicate more directly with them, 
lowering the mayor’s importance.  

According to the interviewee who stated that the lower importance of mayoral support 
for her election, social media virtually dismisses mayors as informational channels. When 
discussing the possibility of a mayor not giving credit for the representative’s actions or trying 
to cheat her, the interviewee said that: 

Today, if the mayor goes there [municipality], there are 400 people there who 
follow our networks and will know that it’s a lie. In two hours, this becomes a 
problem for the mayor. So, she is not so foolish as to do something like this” 
(Chief of Staff 5). 

Finally, elections emerged as the main event to explain discontinuities. Electoral defeats 
(whether of legislators, mayors, or city councilors) can lead to the end of alliances and serve as 
an opportunity for new partnerships among those still in office. It is also clear that except for 
the discontinuity resulting from elections, state representatives rarely explicitly break-up a 
relationship with their brokers. They may not try as hard to assist a mayor or a councilor who 
did not perform well in terms of votes delivered, but they still work on other compensation 
strategies. When they occur, the break-ups seem to come from mayors, who start to consider 
other legislators and search for more promising partnerships to raise financial resources and 
benefits for their hometowns – a phenomenon also observed by Bezerra (1999).  

If it is true that local brokers, especially mayors, play an important role in the legislator’s 
electoral success, one would expect that they would also be held responsible for defeats, to 
some degree. Among our interviewees, two worked for representatives who were not reelected. 
When questioned about the reasons for the legislators’ defeat, although they expressed 
disappointment with the mayors’ performance in terms electoral brokerage, these interviewees 
tended to give more importance to other factors. Among them, they emphasized the office’s 
difficulty to independently communicate with voters using new technologies, such as social 
media. In other words, there seems to be an awareness of the need for representatives to become 
increasingly independent of mediators to get credit for their actions.  

The evidence in this section suggests that principal-agent theories are insufficient to 
characterize the relationship dynamics between state representatives and their local brokers. 
The risks that characterize these relationships do not arise from an inherent conflict between 
the participants’ goals or from informational asymmetry in favor of the agents. Our data shows 
a good deal of continuity between the goals of local brokers and representatives, namely to 
ensure their success in the next round of elections by offering resources and benefits valued by 
the local population and by meeting private requests. Moreover, if politicians recruit brokers 
based on their upward ties with party elites, as pointed out by Brierley and Nathan (2021) and 
suggested by our evidence, we should expect smaller risks of defection and opportunistic 
behavior. If, as we have also seen, participants in these relationships play dual roles, both face 
problems of commitment and informational asymmetry. Although both have exit options 
(Novaes, 2018), they also face obstacles in following this alternative. Ideally, it would be 
rational for legislators to expand their local networks by adding mayors and councilors 
continuously, as well as for mayors to seek more profitable partnerships. However, this implies 
costs, sometimes prohibitive, as highlighted by Hicken and Nathan (2020) and evidenced by 
our interviews. These are some reasons as to why goals between these actors are kept aligned. 

In addition to difficulties in assessing broker performance, actors cannot always produce 
the results expected by their allies. The interviewees believe that, on many occasions, local 
brokers underperform for reasons beyond their control, such as reorganization of forces in local 
politics, party decisions that impact alternatives at their disposal, and alternation of power 
caused by state and municipal elections. Thus, they seem more inclined to acknowledge the 
positive role of local allies than to blame them for bad results. In other words, as opposed to 
what theory assumes, the principal is not always able to adequately punish (or make credible 
threats) to force commitment.  

We can even speculate that in a context of strong electoral competition, such as the 
Brazilian one, the value of loyalty increases (while disloyalty is not exemplarily punished) 
because it brings predictability to the legislator about her “safe” electoral assets. This does not 
mean that, from a representatives’ point of view, investing in brokers is irrational. In line with 
what Hicken and Nathan (2020) propose, this may reflect their perception that, even in the face 
of all the risks and the impossibility of adequately sanctioning brokers, legislators depend on 
them to build their reputation in the municipalities. Furthermore, widespread expectations 
among voters may lead representatives to nurture relationships with brokers, fearing that they 
will have their place taken by their opponents if they do not. Concerning informational 
asymmetry, principals may also develop strategies to reduce their dependence on local brokers. 
For example, they can implement forms of direct communication with their constituencies and 
pursue independent information from other partners. 

Our empirical findings and their interpretation are based on how the institutional design 
established in 1988 in Brazil distributes power, resources, and authority, horizontally and 
vertically, among the branches and the entities of the federation. Many studies have highlighted 
how Brazilian institutions produce a complex system of crossed responsibilities, marked by 
asymmetries of various kinds, a mix of autonomy and dependency, and simultaneous incentives 
for cooperation and competition. This is reflected in the career incentives for politicians – who 
do not necessarily work towards national careers (Samuels, 2003; Santos; Pegurier, 2011) – and 
in many ways in which politicians at different levels connect, articulate, and cooperate to solve 
problems, implement policies, and pursue electoral goals. We cannot characterize these 
relationships as horizontal, but it is neither possible to speak of rigid hierarchies. 

This article focused on the relationships between state legislators and local brokers. We 
investigated the importance and role of local brokers for the state representatives, how they 
build and nurture their partnership, and the reasons behind the eventual break-ups. We based 
our analysis on survey data with state representatives and in-depth interviews with advisors in 
state assemblies.  

We provide evidence that mayors and local councilors play an essential role as brokers 
for some state representatives and that regional ties and friendship are relevant factors in 
building alliances. We also show that legislators nurture these partnerships by meeting local 
brokers’ requests, acting to solve problems with the government bureaucracy, and directing 
public resources to municipalities. We also argue that although legislators strive to monitor 
brokers’ behavior, they are not always able or willing to punish them. 

These conclusions about the Brazilian case might be relevant for other contexts, 
especially for: (i) decentralized countries in which municipalities have political autonomy, 
responsibilities in critical policy areas, and where local politicians have a prominent position in 
the political system; (ii) countries in which municipal elections are held separately from 
elections for the other levels; (iii) settings with a poorly institutionalized party system where 
other elements prove critical in articulating multilevel alliances. 

Based on our findings, we call into question whether a pure principal-agent model is an 
adequate framework for studying the relationships between legislators and local brokers in 
Brazil. We also suggest four lines of investigation that may contribute to advancing our 
understanding of aspects neglected by the literature on the topic. 

Consistent with studies carried out in Brazil and the comparative literature, we observed 
that cooperation between state representatives and local brokers seems worthwhile for both 
sides, notwithstanding the risks they imply. We claim that one should not approach these risks 
as dilemmas typical of principal-agent models. We find no support for the thesis of an inherent 
conflict of objectives between the participants, especially when dealing with brokers who hold 
elective office or have held it in the past. We also point out that although there is information 
asymmetry between the participants, this does not invariably benefit agents or brokers. Thus, 
without evidence to support the fundamental assumptions of these theories, we highlight their 
limits to describe and analyze the relationships studied here. Thus, we propose that principal-
agent theories should not be taken as the primary analytical framework for thinking about these 
relationships. It can be helpful as a heuristic tool since it is employed not as “superior-
subordinate dyads” (Waterman and Meier, 1998) but with more flexibility, considering that 
actors are involved in multiple relationships simultaneously, at different levels and 
temporalities. It is also important to consider that these relationships occur in different contexts 
that impact levels of uncertainty, informational asymmetry, dependence between participants, 
and the degree to which interests and goals converge or not. Thus, elements usually taken as 
universal assumptions should be treated as variables (Waterman and Meier, 1998). This means 
considering that these relationships’ dynamics may vary depending on factors such as the size 
of the municipality, proximity to the election, degree of electoral competition, levels of party 
system institutionalization, potential size of brokerage networks, among others. 

The centrality attributed to brokers who hold elective office as opposed to the other 
representatives’ local supporters shows that it is crucial to better understand this kind of broker 
and what they bring to this relationship. As elected representatives, mayors and councilors are 
subject to control and monitoring by their bosses in part of the time. In the rest of the time, 
while acting as bosses, they demand resources (pork barrel budget amendments and electoral 
support), differently from the rewards that the literature generally identifies for brokers. Even 
those who agree that there is a very diverse range of brokers’ types (Aspinall, 2014; Holland & 
Palmer-Rubin, 2015; Mares & Young, 2016) tend to neglect this distinction between elected 
and non-elected brokers. We speculate that this distinction must imply in different relationship 
patterns with bosses. One way to clarify these differences is to invest in more research focused 
on the brokers themselves. 

A second aspect concerns the need to advance the understanding of brokerage dynamics 
by paying attention to differences between the electoral campaign period and the one beyond 
elections. This is another aspect overlooked by the literature, which often bases its propositions 
about brokers on observations related to campaign activities, overestimating the electoral 
elements of these dynamics. In our study, it was common for interviewees to downplay the 
election’s period importance to claim credit for actions, suggesting this is a more enduring and 
ongoing endeavor. Even if some works have recognized the importance of brokers beyond 
elections and for the production of other political outcomes, such as implementing public works 
and social policies (Auyero, 2000; Zarazaga, 2014; Hoyler, Gelape, and Silotto, 2021), we need 
further research to elucidate the differences and connections between these moments. 

A third analytical task is to explore the differences that characterize the relationships of 
local brokers with state or national representatives. It was surprising to find such striking 
similarities between our analysis and aspects reported by Bezerra (1999) in a study carried out 
twenty years ago. Future research should investigate the reasons for these similarities, 
especially given the differences in duties and authority between national and state legislators. 
They might be due to the similar incentives generated by national and state representatives 
sharing the same rules and running in the same electoral district, for example. Nevertheless, we 
also registered differences, such as the greater volume of resources available to national 
legislators to assist their allies and the greater proximity state legislator’s have to their 
constituencies. It is thus reasonable to expect some kind of division of labor among legislators, 
and that local brokers decide whom to turn to depending on the problem or need to be addressed. 

The last line of inquiry concerns the relevance of other factors for the selection of 
brokers besides political parties. As discussed, the literature in Brazil gives precedence to the 
study of party brokers, which are relevant, as the survey we presented in this paper has shown. 
However, we found evidence that other selection methods, such as personal and regional ties, 
are also important, although little investigated, probably due to the difficulty of operationalizing 
these variables. In order to better understand the dynamics of multi-level support networks and 
refine existing theories, it is crucial to investigate these other factors. 

Our findings have several analytical implications for studying the mediation dynamics 
between political actors at different levels. They suggest some promising research paths, such 
as research designs based on innovative network analysis, the use of social media to identify 
and analyze multilevel alliances, longitudinal analyses capable of measuring factors associated 
with stability and discontinuities, and qualitative research techniques focused on mechanisms 
underlying these relationships. We also stress that using comparative (cross-country or 
subnational) and multi-method research designs is an important tool to maximize the inferential 
potential of analyses in this field. Part of the questions we raised are based on interviews in a 
single state and from a specific legislator profile. Comparative research designs which integrate 
additional quantitative and qualitative evidence would allow us to further explore some of the 
research avenues proposed in the previous lines. 
