Background: The novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic poses 
a potential threat to patients with autoimmune disorders, including multiple 
sclerosis (MS) and neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD). Such 
patients are usually treated with immunomodulatory or immunosuppressive 
agents, which may tamper with the organism’s normal response to infections. 
Currently, no consensus has been reached on how to manage MS and NMOSD 
patients during the pandemic. 

Objective: To discuss strategies to manage those 
patients. 

Methods: We focus on how to 1) reduce COVID-19 infection risk, such 
as social distancing, telemedicine, and wider interval between laboratory 
testing/imaging; 2) manage relapses, such as avoiding treatment of mild relapse 
and using oral steroids; 3) manage disease-modifying therapies, such as 
preference for drugs associated with lower infection risk (interferons, glatiramer, 
teriflunomide, and natalizumab) and extended-interval dosing of natalizumab, 
when safe; 4) individualize the chosen MS induction-therapy (anti-CD20 
monoclonal antibodies, alemtuzumab, and cladribine); 5) manage NMOSD 
preventive therapies, including initial therapy selection and current treatment 
maintenance; 6) manage MS/NMOSD patients infected with COVID-19. 

Conclusions: In the future, real-world case series of MS/NMOSD patients infected 
with COVID-19 will help us define the best management strategies. For the time 
being, we rely on expert experience and guidance.  

The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic is the latest threat to global 
health. It is a fast-spreading respiratory infection caused by a novel coronavirus 
identified in December 2019. As it can evolve to severe acute respiratory 
syndrome (SARS) and has a high transmission rate (on average, each infected 
person spreads the virus to another two people), it poses a challenge to public 
health and clinical practice. The pandemic is not expected to end for at least 18 
months1. During this time, management of chronic autoimmune diseases will be 
a challenge. 

The coronavirus family shows a potential neurotropism that may induce 
neurological disorders, such as inflammatory polyneuropathy, encephalopathy, 
ischemic stroke, and demyelinating diseases. Neurotropism can occur via trans-
lamina cribrosa with SARS-CoV-2 penetrating the central nervous system (CNS) 
through the olfactory tract. Interaction with human cells probably starts with the 
bond between the S1 portion of the virus S protein and the host angiotensin-
converting enzyme (ACE) type 2 receptors2. Those receptors are widespread in 
the human body and the CNS, as they are present in endothelial and arterial 
smooth muscle cells3. Endothelial dysfunction and consequent blood-brain 
barrier disruption may work as an entry door for infected leukocytes into the CNS. 
This scenario might lead to direct viral damage to the parenchyma, as observed 
with other viruses, or trigger clinical events associated with CNS autoimmune 
disorders.  

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic, demyelinating, autoimmune disease 
of the CNS4. It is the most common demyelinating disease and the main cause 
of neurological disability in young adults following trauma5. Neuromyelitis optica 
spectrum disorder (NMOSD) — differential diagnosis of MS — is a group of 
recurrent autoimmune diseases of the CNS that classically affects the optic 
nerves and spinal cord6. It is associated with the presence of antibodies against 
aquaporin-4 (AQP4-IgG) water channel in more than 70% of cases7. AQP4-IgG 
seronegative NMOSD comprises a heterogeneous group of both monophasic 
and relapsing inflammatory CNS disorders, which include diseases related to 
myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibodies (MOG IgG), post-infectious 
inflammation, and other conditions caused by unidentified antibodies8,9. NMOSD 
represents approximately 20% of all demyelinating diseases of the CNS in Latin 
America9.  

MS and NMOSD require continuous preventive treatment to avert 
disability and improve quality of life. There is no cure for MS or NMOSD, but the 
long-term prognosis for patients with both diseases improved considerably over 
the last decade. This situation is mainly thanks to the emergence of a highly 
active immunotherapeutic approach. This treatment strategy includes drugs, 
known as disease-modifying drugs (DMDs), that interfere with the immune 
system through modulating or suppressive mechanisms, which may tamper with 
the organism’s normal response to infections. The follow-up of patients with 
demyelinating disorders is complex and involves regular appointments for clinical 
assessment, routine CNS imaging, and laboratory monitoring, which can be 
perilous during a pandemic. 

Currently, no consensus has been reached on how to manage MS and 
NMOSD patients during the pandemic. The Brazilian Committee for Treatment 
and Research in Multiple Sclerosis (BCTRIMS), the Latin American Committee 
for Treatment and Research in Multiple Sclerosis (LACTRIMS), and the European 
Committee for Treatment and Research in Multiple Sclerosis (ECTRIMS) have 
issued expert recommendations on their websites10,11. In the next few topics, we 
will discuss management strategies for patients with demyelinating disorders that 
have been adopted at two large MS/NMOSD care centers in the city of São Paulo, 
Brazil, during this period. We offer a practical approach aimed at mitigating 
COVID-19 infection risk whilst maintaining clinical stability and safety. 

As social distancing becomes the recommendation to avoid COVID-19 
infection, new ways must be sought to achieve optimal management of patients 
with chronic autoimmune disorders while still maintaining efficient disease 
prevention. Recently, telemedicine has been adopted as a clinical management 
tool, which now has legal support in our country (Law no. 13,989 of April 15, 
2020). Remote care has become a safe way of monitoring patients during the 
pandemic.  

The literature regarding telemedicine and MS has been recently reviewed, 
highlighting benefits in several aspects involved in MS care (e.g., cost-
effectiveness and satisfaction of patients and providers)12. This tool is supported 
by the Brazilian Academy of Neurology, which has recently published 
recommendations for conducting a remote neurological examination13. Simple 
approaches, such as the timed 25-foot walk, are considered feasible ways of 
assessing MS patients. If necessary, more complex evaluations, such as the 
fundoscopic examination, can also be used with proper technological support14. 
However, this method is not without its drawbacks, particularly concerning 
compliance to treatment during extended periods and technological barriers.  

During the current COVID-19 pandemic, phone and/or e-mail contact have 
been established with most patients at both Hospital das Clínicas da Faculdade 
de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo and Faculdade de Ciências Médicas 
da Santa Casa de São Paulo. This contact has allowed direct interaction between 
patient and caregiver in order to reschedule future appointments, check the 
results of laboratory tests and imaging, address patient’s complaints, perform 
drug monitoring/management, and provide information concerning the pandemic. 

Relapse is a demyelinating event of the CNS lasting at least 24 h, in the 
absence of fever or infection4. Thus, infection should be excluded when faced 
with a worsening of neurological symptoms of MS. During the pandemic, ruling 
out COVID-19 is reasonable. As SARS-CoV-2 has been associated with 
demyelinating events in case reports15 during the pandemic, COVID-19 should 
be ruled out for all patients with relapses. As an evaluation protocol, we suggest 
assessing patients for typical clinical findings (e.g., cough, fever, respiratory 
symptoms, hyposmia/anosmia, and hypogeusia). If present, we recommend 
performing chest computed tomography, SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR, and/or 
immunological assays. The sensitivity of the latter may be limited in MS patients 
with impaired humoral responses associated with certain DMDs. 

After ruling out active infection, the next management step is to classify 
relapse severity. For most relapses, consensus treatment consists of 1000 mg 
intravenous infusion of methylprednisolone for 3–5 days. However, at least for 
optic neuritis (ON), this treatment has proven to speed neurological recovery with 
no impact on long-term disability16. Hence, we suggest avoiding corticosteroids 
for the treatment of mild outbreaks. We believe faster improvement of mild 
neurological symptoms does not outweigh the increased infection risk associated 
with 
the 
use 
of 
steroids. 

While intravenous steroids are the mainstay treatment approach for MS 
relapses, studies have shown that relapse treatment with oral steroids can be 
similarly effective17,18. As oral corticosteroids can be administered without 
breaking social distancing, we believe this practice should be considered as a 
treatment strategy during the pandemic. We propose treating relapses with 
custom-made oral methylprednisolone tablets at 1000 mg per day for five days. 
If oral tablets are unavailable (a common situation in Brazil), we recommend the 
use of intravenous methylprednisolone (1000 mg) for five days, preferably in a 
day hospital regimen. In the case of contraindications to high-dose steroids, 
intravenous immunoglobulin (total dose of 2 g/kg administered for 2–5 days) is 
reasonable19. 

We believe more caution is required when dealing with NMOSD relapses. 
These relapses are often more severe, steroid-refractory, and lead to greater 
disability than usually observed in MS20. We suggest that NMOSD patients with 
symptoms suggestive of relapses should be clinically assessed promptly, and 
usual treatment with intravenous steroids and plasmapheresis should be 
considered. If plasma exchange is not available, intravenous immunoglobulin 
may contribute to relapse treatment following incomplete response to steroid 
treatment21. We underline that not all relapses behave the same way. ON and 
longitudinally extensive transverse myelitis (LETM) relapses are usually more 
aggressive, and early plasma exchange is associated with better prognosis20. 
Area postrema syndrome (APS) relapses, for instance, are usually much more 
benign than other typical syndromes. Nonetheless, APS attacks may precede 
inflammatory involvement of optic nerves or spinal cord, making APS an 
important warning sign. About 80% of APS patients improve with steroids 
(methylprednisolone) in the first 2 days of treatment, while less than 20% of them 
need plasmapheresis. We advise early treatment of APS attacks, as it may not 
only reduce clinical severity but also prevent accompanying disabling ON or 
transverse myelitis (TM) attacks8,22.  

Some acute demyelinating events do not fulfill the MS or NMOSD 
diagnostic criteria. They include: acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM), 
idiopathic isolated ON, and idiopathic isolated TM. We suggest treating these 
events with intravenous steroids, immunoglobulin, and plasma exchange, as 
performed outside the pandemic context. These conditions do not usually require 
long-term immunotherapy9. 

MOG IgG-associated optic neuritis, encephalitis, and myelitis (MONEM) 
may present with monophasic or recurrent course8. MOG IgG disease relapses 
usually show a favorable response to steroids. In this specific situation, 
recurrence is associated with long-term seropositivity for MOG IgG, and 
immunosuppressive therapy should be discussed individually23. 

The best initial treatment strategy for MS (induction × escalation therapy) 
is still under debate. Induction therapy is the use of high-efficacy treatments, 
which leads to faster control of disease activity24. Contrarily, traditional escalation 
therapy consists of prescribing safer low-efficacy drugs, which can be later 
switched to more effective alternatives in the face of clinical or radiological 
activity. A recent observational study suggests that the first strategy may lead to 
lower long-term disability25, which greatly favors this approach. However, these 
data still need to be replicated in experimental trials (as in the ongoing TREAT-
MS and DELIVER-MS trials).  

Escalation therapy may be considered for most MS patients, since more 
than 80% of them do not have aggressive MS25. Some DMDs used in this 
approach are not associated with increased risk of infection, such as beta-
interferons, glatiramer acetate, and teriflunomide26. Dimethyl fumarate 
association with increased infection risk was controversial27. Therefore, they 
should be preferred for these patients during the pandemic. 

Nevertheless, around 10%25 of MS patients present with highly active 
disease, and these drugs may not be adequate for them as initial therapy. 
Additionally, the role of each specific DMD in risk and severity of SARS-CoV-2 
infection has not been established yet. Patients with high disease burden may 
require high-efficacy treatments. In these situations, we, as well as the 
ECTRIMS/Multiple Sclerosis International Federation (MSIF), recommend 
selecting therapies not associated with lymphopenia, such as natalizumab. Use 
of fingolimod, cladribine, alemtuzumab, and anti-CD20 monoclonal antibodies 
can lead to lymphopenia28. As they are associated with significant infection risk 
in real-world data, we propose an individualized risk/benefit analysis before 
prescribing 
these 
drugs. 
Moreover, 
in 
a 
recent 
pharmacovigilance 
series, ocrelizumab was not associated with the more severe course of COVID-
1929. Therefore, ocrelizumab may be a treatment option for patients with 
aggressive MS30. 

We do not recommend stopping DMDs for patients already under 
treatment. Stopping fingolimod and natalizumab is associated with rebound31,32. 
Rebound 
can 
lead 
to 
higher 
disability, 
hospitalization, 
and 
further 
immunosuppression (i.e., intravenous methylprednisolone), exposing patients to 
a higher risk of severe COVID-19 infection. 

Currently, there is no specific advice regarding treatment for pregnant 
women, children, or older patients (>60 years of age) with MS during the COVID-
19 pandemic. As geriatric and pregnant patients present an increased risk of 
severe SARS-CoV-2 infection, and a recent meta-analysis has shown that older 
patients may not have an optimal response to MS treatment33, we suggest 
individual risk-assessment when prescribing DMDs for pregnant and geriatric 
patients. 

When untreated, approximately 50% of NMOSD patients will become 
wheelchair-bound and blind, and a third of them will die within 5 years of their first 
attack6. Hence, we strongly recommend not interrupting immunosuppressive 
preventive treatment in NMOSD cases. The two most common first-line treatment 
drugs in NMOSD are azathioprine and rituximab. We suggest rituximab as the 
preferred initial therapy during the pandemic because:  

- 
Both drugs have similar risks of infection34.  

- 
Rituximab is more effective than azathioprine in reducing relapses32.  

- 
Rituximab requires less laboratory monitoring.  

In patients with persistent MOG IgG positivity and NMOSD clinical 
phenotype, we propose the same management strategy, using rituximab as first-
line treatment, at least during the COVID-19 pandemic context23. However, we 
emphasize that MONEM patients may not experience the same efficacy profile 
as AQP4-positive patients35.  

Most MS DMDs require regular clinical, laboratory, and magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) monitoring to assess disease activity and drug-related 
side effects. Lymphopenia, as seen with the use of fingolimod, dimethyl fumarate, 
and anti-CD20 monoclonal antibodies, poses a major concern, as it may be 
related 
to 
a 
higher 
incidence 
of 
infectious 
diseases36.  

Regarding fingolimod, upper and lower respiratory tract infections are 
known for being more common in patients using this DMD. In the pivotal trial37, 
lymphopenia was frequent, and lymphocyte counts were measured monthly in 
the first trimester of use and every three months thereafter. Fingolimod-related 
lymphopenia, however, has not been associated with a higher incidence of 
infections38. Lymphocyte counts are not direct markers of immunosuppression 
because they do not reflect absolute lymphopenia but rather a redistribution of 
cells (lymphocyte retention in lymph nodes). From our perspective, laboratory 
testing should be restricted to the minimum necessary to mitigate coronavirus 
infection. We suggest one complete blood count (CBC) three months after 
introducing the treatment and every six months thereafter, aiming to keep 
lymphocytes above 200 cells.  

Teriflunomide is also associated with lymphopenia. Nonetheless, in a 
pooled analysis of TEMSO, TOWER, TOPIC, and TENERE, low-grade (Grade 1 
or Grade 2) lymphopenia was infrequent, and no high-grade (Grade 3 or Grade 
4) lymphopenia was reported. Furthermore, infection rates in patients treated with 
teriflunomide were similar in populations with and without low-grade 
lymphopenia39. We recommend performing one CBC three months after 
introducing the treatment and every six months thereafter.  

Dimethyl fumarate-related persistent lymphopenia (lower than 500 
lymphocytes for more than 6 months) has been associated with progressive 
multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML). As the original trials used an 800 
lymphocyte-count as the cut-off point for significant lymphopenia and we are 
concerned with the risk of severe respiratory infections in addition to PML, we 
have adopted this cut-off point for reevaluating the DMD choice40. We suggest 
the same monitoring interval and telemedicine follow-up, as adopted for 
fingolimod and teriflunomide. 

Natalizumab is associated with increased infection risk when compared 
to beta-interferons and glatiramer acetate. However, it has a lower infection risk 
than other high-efficacy therapies, such as fingolimod and anti-CD20 monoclonal 
antibodies41. Natalizumab has well-established safety and efficacy profile, except 
for the 0.7% of PML cases in real-life series42. This rare and fatal infectious 
demyelinating disease is caused by a polyomavirus called John Cunningham 
virus (JCV). PML associated with natalizumab use is a constant concern. 
Extended-interval dosing43,44 is a strategy that has proven, through observational 
data, to reduce PML risk, while maintaining treatment efficacy. It consists of a 5–
8 weeks interval dosing of natalizumab instead of the standard 4 weeks (standard 
interval dosing). This strategy is particularly interesting in the COVID-19 
pandemic setting, as it allows less exposure to viral contamination. Our current 
protocol involves a 6-week interval dosing for patients previously treated with the 
standard interval protocol and, in some cases, an 8-week interval dosing for 
patients previously treated with a 6-week interval.  

Anti-CD20 monoclonal antibodies (ocrelizumab and off-label use of 
rituximab) are frequently used for the treatment of MS. Anti-CD20 monoclonal 
antibodies have previously been linked to an increased risk of severe viral 
infections, a major concern during the COVID-19 pandemic. Causal mechanisms 
include: neutropenia, lymphopenia, and hypogammaglobulinemia. Therefore, 
when prescribed, we recommend CBC and immunoglobulin monitoring (total 
serum IgA, IgM, IgG) every six months or in the case of recurrent infection. 
Immunoglobulin replacement in patients with hypogammaglobulinemia is 
associated with lower infection risk related to rituximab use. We consider this 
recommendation particularly important in a viral pandemic context45. CD19 
monitoring may be a reasonable strategy to individualize decision making on 
dosage and reinfusion intervals of B-cell depleting therapies46. Nonetheless, in a 
recent series, ocrelizumab was not associated with severe COVID-1929,47. Thus, 
this treatment option seems reasonable for aggressive MS patients30 with positive 
JCV.  

Cladribine is an immunosuppressive agent used as induction therapy in 
MS patients. It has a preferential lymphocyte depletion that reaches its nadir one 
month after the last administered dose and is further intensified after the second 
cycle48. At that time, a 60% reduction in CD4 count and a 40% decrease in CD8 
are expected, with relative stabilization in a year. We highlight that the degree of 
lymphopenia does not seem to be related to MS relapses. However, more 
pronounced levels (i.e., <500 lymphocytes/mm3) have led to a two-fold increase 
in the incidence of Herpes-Zoster in the pivotal trial.  

Alemtuzumab is an anti-CD52 monoclonal antibody induction therapy. A 
cycle of this drug results in >90% depletion of both CD4 and CD8 in the first 
month, with gradual recovery to 70% of the baseline after a year, just before the 
second cycle49.  

Therefore, cladribine and alemtuzumab significantly compromise 
immune defenses against infection. Some studies have shown that omitting a 
second dose of alemtuzumab may still lead to significant disease control50. 
Nevertheless, more data are necessary before we can affirm this omission will 
not compromise the long-term efficacy of the therapy.  

We acknowledge that highly active MS patients may need a more 
aggressive approach, even when facing a higher infection risk in a pandemic. 
Patients who are older at symptom onset25 (>35 years), have any pyramidal sign, 
and present greater disability (Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) score 
≥3.0) in the first year after symptom onset are at higher risk of developing 
aggressive disease. Those patients represent around 10% of MS patients and 
deserve a very individualized and shared approach. Induction therapy may be 
plausible in this setting25. 

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is an induction 
treatment for MS. It aims to stop MS damage by cell depletion and then 
repopulate the immune system. This treatment has a long sustained effect on the 
immune system. People who have recently received this treatment should extend 
the period of isolation during the COVID-19 outbreak. Patients who are eligible 
for HSCT should consult their neurologists and consider postponing the 
procedure. Table 2 summarizes considerations regarding DMD use for MS during 
the COVID-19 pandemic. 

In addition, we recommend annual CNS imaging (MRI) to be checked via 
telemedicine for almost all stable MS patients. Natalizumab-treated patients with 
double or triple PML risk (combination of 2–3 of the following: previous 
immunosuppression, JCV index >0.9, or >24 infusions) are the exception to this 
recommendation. These patients require MRI monitoring for asymptomatic PML 
screening every 3–6 months. 

Rituximab is frequently used for the treatment of NMOSD. Rituximab leads to an 
increased risk of severe viral infections by several mechanisms, as described 
above. Immunoglobulin monitoring and replacement, as appropriate, may be a 
strategy to reduce infection risk. Regarding B-cell monitoring in NMOSD, 
targeting CD27+ memory B-cells rather than CD19+ B-cells is more likely to 
provide a better measure of rituximab efficacy. In a study, more than half of 
NMOSD relapses occurred at CD19+ B-cell counts below 0.01 × 109/L but above 
the therapeutic threshold for CD27+ memory B-cells. As CD27 markers are not 
available in clinical practice and, as in NMOSD relapses, can be fatal, we suggest 
continuing rituximab dosing at regular 6 months intervals51.  

Chronic steroid use is a common bridge therapy for NMOSD until 
immunosuppressants start to be effective. Infection risk is a dose-dependent side 
effect of steroid use52. Hence, we recommend steroid tapering, when safe. We 
have been using telemedicine as an aid for taper schedule patient guidance.  

Azathioprine is an NMOSD treatment commonly used in Brazil. 
Azathioprine adverse-event data from other autoimmune diseases suggest 
myelosuppression is more common in the first year of therapy (mean time of 8 
months)53,54. Therefore, we recommend considering a longer hematological 
monitoring interval for patients with stable azathioprine use (>1 year) to reduce 
coronavirus exposure risk. We propose routine laboratory testing every 6 months 
during the pandemic for these patients. 

Mycophenolate mofetil has proven to be effective in preventing NMOSD 
relapses55. Its mechanism of action causes immunosuppression through 
cytostatic effects on T and B cells. Data regarding its adverse effects are mainly 
from transplant recipients and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) patient trials. 
Cytopenia and increased risk of bacterial and viral infections are observed among 
these patients56,57. We recommend weekly CBC and liver enzyme monitoring 
during the first 4–6 weeks of treatment and every 3 months thereafter. 

Methotrexate is an immunosuppressive agent occasionally used in 
NMOSD. At a low-dose (e.g., 7.5 to 25 mg), myelosuppression is infrequent, and 
most patients are not prone to opportunistic infections (unless under concomitant 
use of high-dose corticosteroids)58. However, hepatotoxicity is common59. 
Pancytopenia can occur with variable therapy intervals, but predisposing factors 
are present in the majority of these patients (most often impaired renal function)60. 
Thus, during the pandemic, we suggest CBC and liver enzyme monitoring at a 
six-month interval for patients on stable doses of methotrexate without adverse 
events in the last six months. For patients under methotrexate <6 months or with 
a prior history of adverse events, we recommend more frequent monitoring (e.g., 
2–3-month interval)61. Table 3 summarizes considerations regarding DMD use 
for NMOSD during the COVID-19 pandemic.  

Most of the general population are expected to be infected by COVID-19 
in the next months. Most people will be asymptomatic or develop mild disease. 
In Brazil, the Ministry of Health considers the following group as high risk for 
severe COVID-19: people over 60 years of age, those with severe cardiac 
diseases, 
severe 
lung 
disease, 
kidney 
diseases, 
diabetes, 
under 
immunosuppression, and pregnant women. 

MS/NMOSD patients are included in the special population with higher risk 
of severe infection, according to the Brazilian government. Nevertheless, 
currently, there is no clear evidence that MS/NMOSD infected patients present a 
higher risk of life-threatening SARS-CoV-2 disease. The Brazilian Academy of 
Neurology is developing a national database with MS patients infected with 
SARS-CoV-2 to investigate this risk in our country62. In the Italian case series of 
232 MS patients who acquired SARS-CoV-2 infection, 96% of them presented 
mild disease. Only five patients died (2%)47. Four out of these five patients 
presented 
significant 
comorbidities 
(e.g., 
hypertension, 
diabetes, 
cerebrovascular and cardiac diseases), and their mean age was 66.8 (54–82) 
years47.  

In addition to social distancing, we believe certain measures may lead to 
infection prophylaxis. Vaccination should be administered to mitigate infection 
risk in immunosuppressed/immunomodulated patients whenever possible. 
Vaccination schedule suggestions for patients with demyelinating diseases have 
been previously published63. In general, the same principles adopted for patients 
with systemic autoimmune diseases are followed, such as avoiding live 
virus/bacterial vaccines64,65,66. We underline that vaccine effectiveness may be 
compromised in patients under certain disease-modifying therapies (DMTs), such 
as fingolimod, anti-CD20 monoclonal antibodies, natalizumab, alemtuzumab, and 
cladribine.  

During the current pandemic, patients with demyelinating diseases should 
be vaccinated against influenza, as this respiratory virus can coinfect patients 
and lead to severe clinical symptoms. As response to the pneumococcal vaccine 
is severely impaired when associated with the use of anti-CD20 monoclonal 
antibodies67,68, we recommend all patients receive pneumococcal vaccination 2–
3 weeks prior therapy initiation in a stepwise schedule (i.e., PCV13 prime followed 
by PPSV23 boost), with an interval of at least 8 weeks between the two 
vaccinations64,65. In patients receiving anti-CD20 therapies, vaccination must 
start at least 2–3 weeks before treatment or 5–7 months after the last infusion68. 

Patients with severe COVID-19 are susceptible to developing neurological 
complications, 
including 
acute 
cerebrovascular 
diseases, 
impaired 
consciousness, seizures, encephalopathy, and skeletal muscle injury. These 
complications could appear after respiratory symptoms and may be mediated by 
exacerbated immunological response. Immune damage and prothrombotic states 
associated with cytokine storm in COVID-19 might explain some neurological 
symptoms. In fact, it may be responsible for activating glial cells with subsequent 
demyelination. Furthermore, anecdotal cases of CNS demyelinating events after 
SARS-CoV-2 infection have been described69,70. Whether SARS-CoV-2 is 
associated with post-infectious inflammatory demyelinating events is still under 
debate71. 

Immunosuppressive therapies are being studied as cytokine storm 
inhibitors for the adjunctive treatment of severe cases of COVID-19 infection 
(e.g., fingolimod – clinical trial ClinicalTrials.gov, Identifier: NCT04280588). 
Interferons – MS DMDs – have antiviral properties and are of research interest in 
this pandemic (ClinicalTrials.gov, Identifier: NCT04343768, NCT04350671). 
Also, drugs used to treat NMOSD are currently being evaluated in confirmed 
COVID-19 infected patients with severe pneumonia and SARS: tocilizumab 
(ClinicalTrials.gov, Identifier: NCT04317092), eculizumab (ClinicalTrials.gov, 
Identifier: 
NCT04288713), 
and 
intravenous 
methylprednisolone 
(ClinicalTrials.gov, Identifier: ChiCTR2000029386). However, the theoretical 
protective effects of MS/NMOSD DMDs for COVID-19 infections remain to be 
proven. Until further information is available, we suggest stopping DMDs during 
severe SARS-CoV-2 infection. In moderate and mild cases, DMD discontinuation 
should be individualized according to the aforementioned drug-safety profiles, 
patient’s age, and other comorbidities. At this time, any drug that may interfere 
with immune response cannot be considered completely safe in a symptomatic 
patient. 

Accordingly, MS/NMOSD patients infected with SARS-CoV-2 should be 
treated following updated COVID-19 guidelines. In fact, current management of 
COVID-19 is supportive. Since potential treatment benefits of antivirals are not 
evidence-based (e.g., chloroquine derivatives or remdesivir) and data regarding 
interactions with DMDs are lacking, we do not recommend their use. 

If the patient stops taking a DMD during COVID-19 infection, its 
reintroduction should be carefully planned according to MS/NMOSD activity, 
patient's age, and previously used drugs. Moreover, COVID-19 infection severity 
should be observed since it is related to viremia length. The literature has 
reported that after 10 days of symptom onset, 90% of previously positive 
nasopharyngeal RT-PCR in mild infections became negative, while the more 
severe ones remained positive72. In addition, immunosuppression may prolong 
the viremic period even further. At the same time, delaying the reintroduction of 
DMDs may increase the chance of relapses or even rebound (in case of prior 
natalizumab or fingolimod use). Hence, we recommend reintroducing DMDs 4 to 
8 weeks after SARS-CoV-2 infection and encourage neurologists to consult with 
infectious disease specialists aiming to confirm viral clearance for prompt 
immunosuppression. 

The current COVID-19 pandemic is challenging the way we traditionally treat and 
monitor patients with CNS demyelinating diseases. At this moment, there is no 
evidence that infected MS or NMOSD patients present a higher risk of developing 
severe COVID-19. Nonetheless, caution and vigilance are necessary, as these 
patients are frequently immunosuppressed. In addition, their management 
requires adaptation during the pandemic in order to prevent SARS-CoV-2 
infection whilst maintaining treatment safety and efficacy. 

Suggested strategies for MS and NMOSD management during the 
pandemic are:  

- 
Social distancing and using telemedicine.  

- 
Avoiding treatment of mild relapse and using equivalent doses of 
oral steroids to treat MS relapses.  

- 
Preference for drugs associated with lower infection risk 
(interferons, glatiramer, teriflunomide, and natalizumab) and 
extended-interval dosing of natalizumab, when safe.  

- 
Postponing MS induction-treatment.  

- 
Maintaining NMOSD preventive treatment.  

- 
Wider interval between laboratory testing/imaging and using 
telemedicine to check results, when reasonable. 

In the future, case series of MS/NMOSD patients infected with COVID-19 
will help us define the best management strategies. For the time being, we rely 
on expert experience and counsel. Following the example of other centers73, we 
share our current strategies for patient care during the pandemic, hoping they will 
aid clinicians in our country.  

We would like to thank Prof. Dr. Gavin Giovannoni, a worldwide-known expert in 
MS, for kindly allowing us to adapt a table present on his website “MS Selfie” for 
Table 1 (available from: https://sites.google.com/giovannoni.net/clinicspeak-
dmt/home). 
