The recommendation for the integration of Information and Communication Technologies(ICT) for Basic Education, in Brazil, has become more forceful with each curricular reform,under the justification that it is very relevant knowledge for actively participating in the 21stCentury. With the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020, there was a significant stimulus to the uses ofthese technologies to support different forms of education, commonly called emergencyremote education.  Within  this  scenario,  this article  aims to discuss the conceptions  oftechnology in the basic education curriculum and the real conditions of access to ICT. Sothat, literature review and documentary research were carried out. The document outliningthe National Common Curricular Base (BNCC) of Brazilian education together with data fromthe Brazilian Internet Steering Committee census regarding access to ICT in schools andhomes were analyzed. It has been noticed that research carried out in public schools overthe last 8 years, already denounced the lack of investment in technology and in teachertraining for the use of ICT in these schools. In other words, the exposure caused by thepandemic only led to broader public knowledge of what was already the precarious reality inBrazilian public schools. The theoretical conception that prevails in BNCC is not of integralformation,  but  instrumental.  Although  national  curriculum  recommendations  increasinglyencourage the use of ICT in school spaces, the reality exposes that investments in humanand technological resources are not compatible even for limited instrumental teaching, evenwith the social pertinence of the theme.

The expansion of Information and Communication Technologies (ICT)i throughoutdifferent professional areas, leisure and public services, triggers the need for computerknowledge among different professionals and citizens. However, this need for technicalknowledge is not a requirement only for those who make up the specific professional circleof Informatics. Not having an e-mail and not knowing how to use it, for example, can meannot using many public services. This example is minimal, because, in reality, citizens’ needfor IT knowledge goes way beyond their need for effective social participation. 

Our current society is highly digitized, in terms of services, production and products.It is a Society of Networks, about which Castells (2000) explains that it becomes difficult toparticipate in actively and avail of what it offers, if one does not know about or is unable todeal with the digital culture. 

As ICT is an important part of today's culture, it is relevant to economic and socialobjectives,  in  general,  which  reminds  us  of  its  importance  for  the  broad  formation  ofcontemporary citizens, for their own benefit and for social transformation.

This reality justifies the inclusion of ICT teaching in the current basic educationcurriculum. On the other hand, unavoidably, it generates the need to think about how to useICT pedagogically in school in a manner corresponding to the integral training of students,which includes planning the physical and human necessities involved.

Based on the above, this article discusses the recommendations on the use of ICTcontained in the document of the National Common Curricular Base (BNCC) in Brazil anddata on the reality of access and knowledge of ICT by the Brazilian population.

Technologies, in general, tend to be understood only partially in terms of what isknown about them. The most publicized aspect of technological development is that of thepositivity of the product and the beneficial solutions that it brings apart from its dialecticalnature, that is, there is no exposure to the socio-historical relations between humanity andnature, which hinders deeper and more concrete analyzes.

Feenberg  (2003)  explains  that,  in  modern  society,  technology  is  advancing  assomething that is free from previous values, and so, serves as a means to achieve humangoals. For this author, this is an instrumental conception of technology, as it reduces it to thedimension of just a tool under human control. In this perspective, for example, bombs wouldnot be intended to destroy, because that would be a human decision.

Another  very  common  conception  of  technology,  more  associated  withpostmodernism,  is  the  deterministic-technological  one.  According  to  this  interpretation,technology is not only understood as neutral, but also as something that “controls humans,that is, it shapes society to the demands of efficiency and progress” (Feenberg, 2003, p. 7).Here we see statements that technologies solve all kinds of problems, without consideringtheir socio-historical roots.

Feenberg (2003) states that there is still a substantive conception of technology that,despite understanding it as a determinant of social directions, assumes that it has intrinsicvalues, and it is not up to human beings to modify its purposes. 

Searching for a more complete analysis of the relationship between technology andhuman beings, Feenberg (2003) explains that technologies need to be endorsed by moredemocratic and participative processes that contemplate them as cultural artefacts, that is,with their socio-historical relational aspects, so that their use is controlled by the collective,but based on the knowledge of its benefits and dangers. 

Both the instrumental and the deterministic view, in placing technology as neutral,ignore its intrinsic, cultural and social values, blaming isolated human actions. While theinstrumental view adopts only the dimension of a tool for technologies, the determinist oneposits  them  as  a  solution  to  several  social  problems  that have  their  origin  outsidetechnological development.

In  Brazil,  the  pedagogical  discourse  based  on  technology  is  predominantlyinstrumental and deterministic (Peixoto & Araújo, 2012). In this line, the instrumental visionof ICT in education is understood only as a didactic resource, under the command of humanaction. Deterministic philosophy, on the other hand, believes in technological supremacy,placing it as the salvation of educational problems. According to these two trends, whenthings are not going well in school education, it is either because the teacher does not knowhow to use technologies or because the school has not adopted them in a structural way,which would transform education. These perspectives, in addition to blaming only a humandimension, do not take into account the social issues of students and their families, freespublic authorities from the responsibility of their roles and do not seek to explain the reasonsfor the choices made in schools.

Considering the objectives of Brazilian education, the  function of the school is theintegral development of students, not being restricted to skills for the labor market, as thisrestriction compromises “its role in relation to its priority purposes of teaching content andpromoting the development of the students´ intellectual skills” (Libâneo, 2016b, p. 48) tosurvive in their society.

For  intellectual  development,  the  technical  teaching  of  sciences  as  historicallyconstructed by humanity is necessary, since it is from the domain of their logical thinking thateach one can reason within different life situations.

Formal instruction that is  taught at school must be  oriented  towards  intellectual development, which occurs through scientific thinking:

Formal  instruction,  which  radically  alters  the  nature  of  cognitive  activity,  greatlyfacilitates the transition from practical operations to theoretical operations. […] Thesignificance of schooling is not only in the acquisition of new knowledge, but also inthe creation of new reasons and formal modes of verbal, discursive and logicalthinking divorced from immediate practical experience. (Luria, 2008, p. 133; 178).

In this sense, the instrumental and deterministic perspectives of technology will guidethis same type of practice, which does not match the school purposes of intellectual andintegral emancipation. Such perspectives emphasize only the face of technology as a tool atthe service of humanity, regardless of other aspects. In the case of education, teaching howto operate tools is not bad, but it is insufficient for educational objectives, as it remains in useonly  at  this  level  and  does  not  advance  to  concepts,  that  is,  to  explanations  andunderstanding  socio-historical  relationships.  Furthermore,  teaching  restricted  to  theoperational tends to remain part of fixed everyday knowledge.

Basic common knowledge is essential to trigger and develop scientific knowledge,that is, it has its relevance, but the school should not be restricted by it. The school exists toteach us what is not taught on a daily basis. Being stuck using only everyday knowledgedoes not raise the capacities of thinking, because, for that to happen, an understanding ofthe concept of things is necessary, to develop dialectical thinking from an early age. Forexample, there are many who know how to make bread, but not everyone knows how toexplain the physical-chemical processes that take place for bread to become bread; and onlythose who know how to explain the reasons have mastery of the subject, being able to usethis knowledge to analyze and recreate.

The need to formulate dialectical thinking at all stages of education is a necessity. [...]Theoretical thinking does not arise or develop in people's daily lives; it develops onlyin response to instruction, where programs are based on the dialectical understandingof thought. It is precisely this teaching that has a developmental character. (Davydov,1999, p. 5; 7).

Operational and everyday use only, as they are not explanatory and relational in theirentirety, do little to contribute to knowledge that can support critical and creative thoughts.They  are  more  about  executing  and  fulfilling  tasks  rather  than  concerned  about  theirexplanation, so they do not contribute to broad intellectual development.

As for ICT, for example, many people use cell phones daily. However, most of them,if asked to open their e-mail on a computer, do not know how, because they do not knowwhat a browser, website or e-mail is, they do not know if they have a password, etc. Thesetools are used as applications on cell phones that are regularly open, and don´t requiremuch knowledge for daily use. Knowledge of everyday use does not mean dominance to thepoint that the person knows how to use it in his / her favor in other situations (Souza et al.,2020; Peixoto, 2010) where they may require a little more knowledge, for example, inprofessional situations or to resolve academic issues. 

The belief that the possession of digital equipment alone automatically leads tocomplete knowledge is a fallacy, since research (Peixoto & Araújo, 2012; Luria, 2008;Davydov, 1999) shows  that knowledge  depends, among other conditions, on receivingformal  instruction,  having  concrete  favorable  teaching  conditions,  psycho-emotionalconditions, etc., in addition to access to equipment. On the part of teachers, access toequipment  and  the  internet  alone  are  also  not  enough  for  them  to  be  able  to  makepedagogical use of ICT in an integrated manner in their area of specialization, as they alsoneed to acquire the necessary knowledge.

With  the  transformation  of  the  productive  processes  of  today's  society,  manyprofessional activities and services for citizens have been converted to digital models, whichrequires a minimal knowledge of IT. In the public sector at the federal level, in Brazil alone,according  to  the  Digital  Government  Secretariat  at  the  Ministry  of  the  Economy,  thedigitization  of services has  already  reached  54% of the public  services offered  to thepopulation before the pandemic. By the end of 2020, the federal government had mademore than 60% of its services available digitally, with the goal of reaching 100% by the endof 2022 (Brasil, 2020).

This movement towards high digitalization has been occurring more sharply in Brazilsince the end of the 1990s. We are aware that this is not a natural course of events, butrather, the result of political-economic choices reflecting the Brazilian attitude to be part of aglobalized world (Enders, 2004; Akkari, 2011). These steps were further accelerated with theonset  of  social  distancing  triggered  by  the  Covid-19  pandemic,  resulting  in  the  crisisdovetailing with a government project already underway.

Incentives for the implementation of the Digital Government project and other ICTintegrations in public services are part of recommendations by international multilateralorganizations (World Bank, World Trade Organization - WTO, Organization for EconomicCooperation and Development - OECD, etc.), especially of economic interest, but contrastswith the financing offered to Brazil (Libâneo, 2016a; Freitas, 2011; Evangelista, 2013).

In spite of the advantages of flexible services for the population via ICT, in fact, whatmotivates this race are economic and control interests between developed and developingcountries.  The  commercialization  of  ICT  and  its  services  is  hidden  behind  citizenshipdiscourses. Brenda et al. (2018, p. 5) explain that “citizenship has been subject to deepforms of marketization. The right to have rights is therefore conditional on the market andsharply graded around organized and organizable capacities, resources, interests, etc.”.These are other reasons why the intensity of the recommendations and implementations ofthe use of ICT in different services should be critically evaluated, since, on the one hand,they may impact on less investments for the government, but on the other hand, this maymean more exclusion and a lower quality of services that require human resources, such aseducation, for example.

In the case of Education, the process of digitalization has also followed the economicline, trying to invest less and less in teacher training and in the formation of society ingeneral, and increasingly in technologies that control the management of public departmentsand  replicate  didactic  content  without  spending  on  human  resources  (Libâneo,  2016a;Freitas, 2011; Evangelista, 2013). On the quality of learning, the substitution of teachers fordigital didactic resources feeds a process of reproduction of the current system, whichserves the dominant elites, as the insufficient pedagogical quality significantly weakens thequality of learning, failing to achieve even technical objectives of training (Costa & Libâneo,2018; Nascimento et al., 2020).

Despite these motivations, in the face of this highly digitalized scenario that has atendency to increase, instead of denying it, we need to be concerned about offering qualityaccess and training to the population. Also in terms of ICT, permitting that citizens areemancipated and can use these services, as well as achieving a level of employability and,in general, remain participative in this society.

IBGE surveys (2018) show that 33% of the Brazilian population is somehow digitallyexcluded. It may seem like a good result if we consider that, in 2009, it was practically theopposite: only 39% of the population accessed the Internet. However, when we look closelyat the current data, it is observed that 50% of the Brazilian population of classes D and E stilldo not have access to the Internet; while more than 90% of classes A and B have suchaccess (CGI.br, 2019a). These figures show that, fundamentally, the digital divide is not theresult of an age group that has or has not had contact with ICT since childhood. Despitesome advantage of the so-called digital natives, digital exclusion has more to do with theopportunities  for  access  to  digital  devices,  as  well  as  with  their  learning  opportunities(Conceição, 2019; Krug et al., 2018). 

Digital exclusion can be treated, in general, in two aspects, in which one compoundsthe other: exclusion of access to equipment and the Internet; and exclusion from digitalknowledge. In any case, the digital exclusion indexes are more linked to the socioeconomicissues of each citizen, that is, to the socioeconomic inequalities historically continued inBrazil, which precede the existence of this intense digital world of today. 

According to the research, ICT Education 2018 (CGI.br, 2019b), young people’sability to use the Internet is closely linked to self-taught experiences. According to the study,80% of students in public and private schools in the country learned to use the Internet bythemselves, which indicates learning more focused on basic common knowledge. Later, inthe same research, it is  noted that "the available  evidence  points  to the continuity  ofinequalities between schools, both in terms of the use of technologies and in the conditionsof access of the population to education in general". (CGI.br, 2019b, p. 116).

Every Brazilian  citizen  in  training  has the  right to technical-scientific  knowledgedeveloped by humanity throughout its history. Thus, with regard to the appropriation ofknowledge of digital technologies, it cannot be different:

An omission by educators in  relation  to the social demands posed by the newparadigm of the productive process would tend to be detrimental to the interests ofthe  excluded  social  sectors.  The  resistance  to  a  widespread  diffusion  of  newinformation and communication technologies, in public schools under the argumentthat they are inserted in the logic of the market and cultural globalization, would havethe effect of more exclusion and more social selectivity. This is due to their non-integration with the teaching practices and would impede opportunities for students toreceive and divulge information, leaving them unattended in the face of the onslaughtof cultural and political manipulation [...] It is not fair, therefore, that alongside theintensification of the production and dissemination of information, a large contingentof the population should be excluded as a result of this process. (Libâneo, 2011, p.61).

Knowing that more than 81% of Brazilian students in basic education attend publicschools, be they municipal, state or federal (INEP, 2019), it is relevant that the teaching ofICT is part of the school curriculum at this educational level in Brazil and should also betaught in public schools, the principal space for formation for most Brazilians.

In pursuit of the goals established, we have been guided by the historical-dialecticalmaterialist method (MHD) to carry out bibliographic and documentary research. 

Cury (1986, p. 27) explains that contradiction is a basic category of MHD dialectics.Contradiction  is  the  “[...]  internal  motor  of  development,  it  reflects  the  most  originalmovement of the real”. The search for contradictions, whether in documents or empiricalmanifestations, aims to highlight the historicity and complexity of social relations, whichhelps to demystify deterministic positions. 

As for the analysis of documents, it is noteworthy that

Documents disseminate statements about the world in which we live that both intendto offer unique representations of reality and bring idealized solutions to diagnosedproblems. It should be noted that any discourse, by emphasizing certain objects andcertain concepts, omits others [...] this distorted discourse can help dominant groups,but it is doubtful whether these benefits will be shared by those who do not belong tothese groups. (Ball, 1994 apud Shiroma et al., 2005, p. 439).

From  the  perspective  of  finding  contradictions  between  idealized  solutions  andreality, the Internet Steering Committee in Brazil (CGI.br, 2018a, 2018b, 2019a, 2019b)collected the BNCC data on Brazilians’ access to ICTs for 2018 and 2019. The results ofthese documentary analyzes are discussed in categories A and B for the next section.

The  analyzes  were  organized  into  three  categories:  a)  Conceptions  that  guideBrazilian ICT recommendations in basic education; b) The Brazilian reality regarding accessto computer and internet equipment; c) The population’s knowledge of  DICT.

In the first documents with curricular guidelines, at national level, in Brazil (Brasil,1997; 1998), instrumental and deterministic trends of understanding of technology werealready appearing (Costa, 2020). Such documents guided Brazilian basic education until2017,  when  the  final  version  of  the  National  Common  Curricular  Base  (BNCC)  waspublished (Brasil, 2017), and is a document currently in force.

In the BNCC, the focus is on digital information and communication technologies(DICT), and according to goal 5 is recommended as a structuring goal, (Brasil, 2017, p. 9), atall levels of basic education and, later, in all specific areas. Thus, the transversality of DICTin the document creates possibilities for its permeability at all levels and areas of knowledge,becoming one of the pillars of the Brazilian school curriculum.

In another section, it states that digital culture is responsible for significant socialchanges, without considering political-economic choices, assuming it as a natural and not asocial process. Therefore, the adoption  of DICT is regarded only  as a beneficial tool,something more linked to the consumption and the preparation of human labor for work thanthe development of critical and creative thinking:

It must also be considered that digital culture has promoted significant social changesin contemporary societies.  As a result of  the  advancement and multiplication  ofinformation and communication technologies and the growing access to them due tothe greater availability of computers, cell phones, tablets and the like, students aredynamically inserted into this culture, and not only as consumers. (BNCC, 2017, p.61).

The lack of criticism in the document stands out, by affirming digital culture as adeterminant and assuming the population as digitally included. This uncritical assumption oftechnologies  is  explained  by  the  adopted  views  of  deterministic  and  instrumentalphilosophies that, on the one hand, regard technologies as a sure solution to problems and,on the other hand, transfer responsibility to those who will or will not use them (Feenberg,2003), without any questions about the abilities they have for this.

It is not part of developing critical thinking, but the use of DICT at school is assumedand encouraged in a vacuum unaccompanied by supporting data and evidence of contextviability.  Consequently,  it  views  them  as  another  teaching  resource  that  will  be  used,according to how the teacher chooses. Further on in the document, the BNCC reaffirms thatthe  practices  of  digital  culture  must  be  prioritized  because  the  quality  of  learning  isdependent on it:

Thus, work proposals that enhance students' access to knowledge about the digitalworld and the practices of digital culture should also be prioritized, as they directly orindirectly impact their daily lives in the various fields of social action and arouse theirinterest in and their identification with DICT. Its use at school not only allows forgreater technical and critical appropriation of these resources, but also determinesmeaningful and autonomous learning by students. (BNCC, 2017, p. 487 - emphasisadded).

The implicit understanding of learning and the development of autonomy regarded asdependent on DICT demonstrates the deterministic orientation of the document in question.It is understood that the use of DICT alone does not enable the development of critical andreflective capacities, and is not even a condition for meaningful learning. As researchers intointellectual development explain, (Davydov, 1999; Luria, 2008; Libâneo, 2011), meaningfullearning for the student depends on teaching that involves logical-investigative proceduresfor each science, which means that the pedagogical approach, oriented by the teacher, iswhat impels the student for learning and, later, for development. Long before DICT existed,teachers had already developed this type of teaching.

It is one thing to recognize DICT as part of the developed human culture. Anotherthing is to propose them as unique solutions to social problems arising from socio-historicalchoices, as if technological artefacts could solve any of these problems and, even more, as ifthe relationship with them only produced good results.

The emphasis placed on the BNCC is to provide service to the labor market:

It is necessary to guarantee sufficient learning for young people to work in a society inconstant  change,  to  prepare  them  for professions that  do  not  yet  exist,  to  usetechnologies that have not yet been invented and to solve problems that we do notyet  know.  Certainly,  most  future  professions  will  involve,  directly  or  indirectly,computing and digital technologies. (BNCC, 2017, p. 473).

The  relationship  between  an  instrumental  curriculum,  deterministic-technologicalorientations  and  the  emphasis  on  the  labor  market  reveal  that  economic  interestspredominate  in  the  document  in  question.  Hence,  there  is  no  need  for  emancipatoryproposals. Boom (2004, p. 220 apud Libâneo, 2016b, p. 46) writes “despite the fact that thisnew strategy is expressed in terms of humanitarian goals and the preservation of freedom, itseeks a new form of control over nations and their resources”.

In several other excerpts, the defense of teaching only how to use the tools at theexpense of critical and creative teaching is clear. In this way, the intention of the document inquestion is evident in favoring an operational teaching of DICT and is superficial with regardto intellectual development.

In order to ensure the integration of DICT into the teaching-learning processes, whichare also the basis of the current distance education processes, it is necessary to consider, atleast, the issues of equipment and internet ownership, at school and at home. The issue ofhaving sufficient knowledge to handle study tasks in addition to readings and videos, that is,thinking about the production of activities in digital mode, as well as the ability to share themis also something important to be considered. In this way, the student, in fact, can continuethe study process wherever he is, including completing homework assignments. There areother dimensions  such as emotional,  family  and  financial aspects that deeply  affect astudent's studies, which demonstrates that the flexibility of the integration of DICT, evenwhen it culminates in possibilities for distance study, does not guarantee academic success(Costa  &  Santos,  2017;  Costa  et  al.,  2020).  However,  here  in  this  text  focus  will  bemaintained  on  such  aspects  as  the  physical  conditions  of  possession  and  acquiringknowledge  of  technology,  both  in  public  spaces  and  homes,  to  construct  satisfactorysituations for education and study with and via DICT.

Research data from the Internet Steering Committee in Brazil in 2019 showed that64% of Brazilian public schools have computer labs and 57% have access to the Internet(CGI.br, 2019b). However, this access has been limited to the administrative sectors of theschools and many laboratories have been abandoned due to the lack of investments intechnical maintenance and adequate human resources. Thus, the devices and internetaccess that exist in schools are not available to students in more than 70% of the schoolsthat have them. Only 34% of public schools were able to update their equipment in theperiod from 2015 to 2018 (CGI.br, 2018a, 2018b, 2019b), as they do not receive regularinvestments to keep computer labs, mobile devices and even the Internet functioning.

It was also noted that in 26% of urban schools there is no computer available forstudents to carry out any type of consultation and only 14% of the public use some virtualteaching-learning environment even on an infrequent basis. As for rural schools, 40% ofthem have only one computer, 52% of teachers say they use cell phones for activities and65% of managers use personal cell phones for administrative activities.

This data shows that the physical and technological inadequacies of both urban andrural schools (which are even worse) cannot sustain the pedagogical integration of DICT. Inspite of the fact that data shows that 64% of urban public schools have computer labs, itmust be made clear that they are spaces that do not accommodate an entire class of 30students, for example. Most of these laboratories (78%) have less than six computers andonly 9% have slightly more than 21 computers (CGI.br, 2018b, 2019b). Most classes startingthe second phase of elementary school in Brazil have more than 35 students. 

As for other public spaces that could serve the population with access to computersand the internet, significant investments were made, especially between 2002 and 2012(Bueno,  2017). However,  in  recent years,  only  45%  of  them remain  in  operation  andconditions are insufficient, just as in schools (CGI.br, 2018b, 2019b). These public spacesinclude libraries and technology centers, also known as the Educational Technology Center(NTE). For some years these were spaces open to the public where the population couldattend, free of charge, to do research on the internet. They could also avail of such servicesas generate a copy of their personal public accounts (utilities) to be paid, enrollment forpublic services and tenders and digital services in general. In addition, basic computercourses were offered to the community and to teachers (Bueno, 2017). This type of location,although not the main one for a student, served as a support and complement for them andindeed for the entire population.

With regard to access at home, despite the research showing interesting quantitativedata such as, for example, that 67% of the Brazilian population over 10 years old haveinternet and more than 95% have cell phones (CGI.br, 2018a, 2019a), an analysis of thisdata is needed to identify the bottlenecks and show how much investment is still needed inthis area for the lower classes, especially if they require digital environments to participate indistance activities. Of the internet that appears in households, 56% is via cell phone and only28% of these homes have some streaming service (Idem). This means that access is limitedand shared between the family, both from the point of view of capacity and equipment,because cell phones are not sufficient for the purposes of study.

When doing an analysis by social class, it is observed that only 37% of the totalBrazilian households have a computer and Internet together. Thus, classes D and E aredependent on Wi-Fi and cell phones, which results in a lower average daily use. 

Ownership of computers in Brazilian households reached 56% in the years prior to2016 but is currently below 40% in the homes of public school students (CGI.br, 2018,2019a). It is observed that, from 2011 to 2019, the increased possibility to own cell phonesimplied the abandonment of having computers. This is possibly due to the need to choosebetween one and the other, and the cell phone is preferred due to the lower price, itscommunicative functions and its easier mobility. Thus, it is noted that the use of the Internethas only increased via cell phones, as the number of computers per household, publictelecenters and computer labs active in schools has decreased.

On average, 70% of the population has access to the Internet, but more than 90% isvia cell phone (CGI.br, 2019a). On the one hand, cell phone access helps because itincreases the chance of accessing the Internet, but on the other hand, it can indicate bothloss of purchasing power and little knowledge about computer uses, and / or difficulty inpurchasing  computers  and  contracting  better  internet  services.  The  cell  phone  is  alsoassociated  with faster, everyday  operational uses, which  does  not always  indicate  themastery of academic and professional knowledge of these tools. For the purposes of longerstudies,  for  example,  reading  and  tasks  requiring  digital  production,  the  most  suitabledevices are computers.

As for knowledge about DICT, it is worth stating that the lack of this knowledgeaffects the general population, including teachers and students. When analyzing classes Aand B, it is observed that, at least 90% of people have a working knowledge of IT (CGI.br,2019a). However, among the lower classes, this is not true, as this type of education doesnot yet exist in the public school, where most of them study or studied. Neither are they ableto pursue private courses due to financial and working conditions. When questioned, aboutthe reason they do not know basic informatics, people from classes D and E stated that it isdue to the costs involved (CGI.br, 2019a, 2018a).

In general, 56% of internet users regularly request a service. Among these services,there are requests for transportation (32%), movie-streaming services (28%), requests fordelivery of meals (12%), and paid courses (6%), among others. 

As for teachers, 56% say they know how to manipulate files / folders and 29% knowhow to create files for a slide show (CGI.br, 2019b). Note that they are simple activities butyet,  the  number  of  teachers  who  can  master  them  remains  low.  Only 34% of teachers over 30 years of age participated in continuing education, 54% of teachersup to 30 years of age took some discipline on ICT during their college education years and70% of teachers use DICT only for their pedagogical and academic planning.

In addition to the data from CGI.br, the bibliographic survey carried out regardingteacher training in DICT allowed us to verify that, at the level of initial teacher training, therehas been little curricular change, even though ICT has been recommended as part of theofficial Brazilian curriculum since the mid-1990s (Gatti & Barreto, 2009; Lopes & Furkotter,2016; Dorneles, 2012; Santos, 2009; Marinho, 2008).

Lopes and Furkotter (2016) explain that, in most college degree courses, the mostcommon scenario is of an almost total absence of subjects that address the possibilities ofusing  ICT in the teaching-learning  process. When these themes are mentioned  in thecurricula of undergraduate courses, they are usually technically focused and isolated fromother disciplines.

As for the continuing  education of teachers, Marinho (2008) demonstrated that,although some government programs were widely available, the outreach was low and, infact, it was initial training for most teachers, although what was needed was to update theirinitial training and plan more consolidated ongoing training.

Another  important  fact  regarding  the  human  resources  that  would  make  thepedagogical use of DICT  feasible,  is the  regular  presence  of a multidisciplinary  team,composed of at least, a computer technician and a pedagogical facilitator. The former ofthese professionals was a reality from 2006 to 2013 in the State of Goiás and it variedacross Brazil. In essence, their role was to assist teachers in computer labs, mainly with thepedagogical  aspect of  ICT integration  and  disciplinary  knowledge  (Bueno,  2017;  Brito,2008). In most schools, the facilitator was a teacher, and could be from any area. It was amultitasking profile, but in some municipalities, he may have been a computer technician.The variety of functions exercised by this individual meant that a focus on the pedagogicalfunction was not always possible, which was further impaired when the professional did nothave a teaching background.

The presence of a motivating individual in the laboratories, in a way, generatedsecurity for the teacher regarding the technical environment of the laboratory and its possiblecomplications, in addition to supporting the development of content, the selection of tools,etc. The role of this professional should have been more directed to the pedagogical areaand not exclude the presence of a technician in the school, since the latter is technicalsupport and the former should be specialized support in the pedagogical use of DICT.Currently, the presence of this motivator is almost non-existent in public schools (Brito,2008). There is also no computer technician per school.

In view of the analyzed data, it appears that access to ICT in Brazil, despite havingevolved quantitatively via cell phone, has decreased qualitatively, because access to thecomputer  devices  that  enable  more  elaborate  studies  and  professional  activities  hasdecreased sharply, as well as access to it through schools and other public spaces, asshown earlier. Access to academic and professional knowledge about ICT has evolved verylittle for teachers, as shown by the research of the aforementioned bibliographic review.

As for the general population, access to knowledge in DICT has not evolved as itremains outside the formal instruction in public schools with their lack of technological andhuman resources, and so are, justifiably, unable to implement it. The social classes thatmost need this learning at school, classes D and E are the poorest and if they want to learnbasic computing, they need to pay for this training in other private spaces, as the publictelecenters are also in precarious situations as described above. This situation means theyonly have a very basic routine knowledge of these tools, if even this.

More than 90% of the use of DICT by Brazilians is related to everyday uses, usuallyrestricted to communication by instant messages and posting on social networks (CGI.br,2019a). This of course is linked to the use of cell phones, and as such does not guaranteesufficient technical understanding for the intellectual and integral development of individuals.It is essential not to take access to cell phones as an indication of growth and evolution inthe mastering of IT, much less considering the type of knowledge we have about theirfunctions. 

Returning to Davydov (1999), basic IT knowledge is not enough for the superiordevelopment of individuals. Thus, having a cell phone, even a robust one, but not knowinghow to use it or its technical potential, indicates a false evolution in terms of digital inclusionrates and in terms of technical knowledge and access to IT.

Given the scenario we have outlined, it can be said that this reality of insufficienttechnological infrastructure in public schools and in households corroborates the idea thatneither one nor the other are prepared for a curriculum that requires the use of digitalequipment and technical knowledge. Added to this difficulty is the insufficient training ofteachers to ensure the development of their area of specialization in conjunction with DICTin curriculum development.

Considering that this reality preceded the pandemic period, this explains the wideand deep difficulties faced by school teams, parents and students in making adaptations foremergency remote education in such a short period. For this reason, before encouragingand allowing the continuation of different models of distance education, it is essential that thepublic authorities assume their responsibility to regularly renew and maintain an adequatetechnological infrastructure in schools and focused teacher training. Brenda et al. (2018, p.5) state that “the state has retreated from the social commons, only appearing to aid the gripof privatization and speculation.”. They should also initiate projects to promote this enhancedusage of IT in households where there are students. It is not enough to put it on the nationalcurriculum, the State needs to provide the population with the proper means.

The BNCC reflects a belief that these technologies are the determinants of andsavers of Brazilian educational problems. But what should be incorporated and integrated asincreased knowledge historically produced by humanity, comes rather with its own interests,intensely influenced by market interests, in a way that is out of context of the Brazilian socio-economic reality. Its recommendations are, fundamentally, focused on providing teachingtools, which really should only constitute part of the knowledge to be imparted to students inICT. It does not mention how and when investments will be made in the technologicalinfrastructure of schools, nor in the training of teachers to work with digital technologies atthe expected intensity and, does not guarantee internet access in homes.

Although  the  BNCC's  guidance  on  DICT  is  not  critical  and  emancipatory,  weunderstand that its absence in schools only denies its materiality in today's real concretesociety, which also fuels the status quo of the dominant classes. By denying the integrationof ICT in school processes, under the discourse that not everyone has the capacity toaccess them, it neither protects those who do not have access, nor fights for improvementsin  conditions  that  need  to  change  to  stop  feeding  the  system  that  excludes  them.Furthermore, by not integrating ICT in school processes, the opportunity to do so from acritical perspective is lost, and ensures continued space for instrumental and deterministicinterpretations to consolidate, more and more. 

The necessary conditions are insufficient, both in public schools and in households inclasses D and E, which are those who attend this type of school. Most Brazilian publicschools do not have human or technological resources to support the development ofteaching permeated by ICT, either in person or at a distance. In reality, what can be done,and has been done even during the pandemic period, amounts only to the delivery ofmaterials sent by different messaging applications. Then, students do the tasks and returnthem using the same devices. There has been no distance education, as it is not possibleunder these conditions. Thus, the discourse of flexibility and advantages of distance studies,of using devices in general, has been used to convince people, but, in practice, there hasbeen no online education guided by interaction and integral training, as shown by authors(Costa & Libâneo, 2018), since before the pandemic.

Investments in technological infrastructure in schools, in incentives for students toacquire equipment and the internet, and in training teachers to use ICT are not proportionalto the recurring insistence that ICT and hybrid teaching methods should be used in Brazil.The  government  invests  in  the  digitalization  of  its  services,  but  it  does  not  invest  ininfrastructure or in developing and disseminating knowledge in people so that in fact theycan participate in these services. The government is absent from investments related to thepopulation and focuses on digitalization that will bring savings to public spending.

The BNCC, on the one hand, deals with the use of ICT removed from the Brazilianschool and home reality. On the other hand, it institutionalizes the public interest and createsa legal mechanism that can trigger investments and other corresponding changes so that itsestablished objectives are achieved. Thus, it is essential to seek from public agencies therequirements for investment in schools, teacher training and specific access packages to bemade available to the homes of students in public schools.In addition to school environments, the government needs to ensure quality accessto computers and the internet, as school life continues at home with tasks and projects thatoften  require  Internet  research  and  online  collaborative  work.  Otherwise,  they  will  justcontinue to renew their old correspondence education into digital correspondence education.

The necessary inclusion of ICT in education cannot be denied due to its culturalrole in today's society. Instead, it is more relevant to include them using critical pedagogicalapproaches  that  consider  their  socio-historical  and  cultural  aspects  for  broad  humandevelopment. Otherwise, it contributes, on the one hand, to the digital exclusion cycle forlow-income populations especially, and, on the other hand, it maintains the space alreadywell occupied by instrumental and deterministic pedagogical approaches, contributing to theconsolidation of these approaches. Instead of denying the integration of DICT in schools,which continues to exclude people and generates even more exclusion, it is necessary tostrive for conditions of excellence in public schools, as well as appropriate human resourcesin order to qualify teaching.