Objective: To report the incidence between Deep Vein Thrombosis (DVT) in ipsilateral 
femur and tibia fractures (floating knee), considering its relation with hospitalization 
time, fracture classification, treatment implemented and comorbidities.  

Methods: This is a retrospective observational analytical study using the medical charts 
of thirty patients admitted with floating knee to a trauma hospital between October 
2016 and July 2017.  

Results: Of the 30 patients assessed, 25 (83%) were men and 5 (17%) women. The most 
affected age range was between 21 and 30 years (36%). The dominant limb was affected 
in 17 (57%) patients. A total of 19 (63%) patients were classified as Fraser type I, 18 (60%) 
had open (compound) fractures, 16 (53%) fractures of the tibia and 8 (26%) of the femur. 
The most widely used emergency treatment was external fixation of the femur and tibia 
(25 patients = 83%). Seven patients used a femur plate and external fixator in the tibia 
as definitive treatment. Of the 30 patients studied, 14 (46%) suffered infectious 
complications, 9 (30%) superficial and 5 (16%) deep. Deep venous thrombosis was 
observed in 17% of patients (p=0.409).   

Conclusion: Despite the use of antithrombotic prophylaxis, there was a high incidence 
of DVT in the affected limb of patients with floating knee. Fraser I fractures, being male 
and the non-dominant limb increases the likelihood of developing DVT. 
Level of Evidence: Level I 

One of the main complications of lower limb fractures is Deep Vein Thrombosis 
(DVT)1, which may result in risk of death, such as pulmonary thromboembolism2. DVT 
has a direct relation with high-energy trauma3.  

A number of protocols are used to avoid this complication, the most common being 
the routine use of anticoagulants in prophylactic doses, such as low molecular weight 
heparin. Despite the high cost, this measure is effective in preventing DVT, lowering 
treatment costs and avoiding morbidity with considerable risk of death or permanent 
sequelae to the patient4.  

Ipsilateral femur and tibia fractures, described by Blake and McBryde in 1975 as 
floating knee5, are associated with high-energy mechanisms6 and as such, a greater 
relation with DVT is expected. 

Fraser classified floating knee into 2 types. Type I is characterized by diaphyseal 
femur and tibia fractures, while type II affects the knee joint and is subdivided into type 
IIA; diaphyseal femur and intra-articular tibia fractures; IIB: intra-articular fractures of 
the femur and diaphyseal of the tibia and IIC: intra-articular femur and tibia fractures7. 

The aim of the study is to retrospectively relate the association between deep vein 
thrombosis (DVT) and ipsilateral fracture of the femur and tibia (floating knee) in 
patients under antithrombotic therapy.  

This is a retrospective cross-sectional analytical study of patients treated in 
Fortaleza Ceará state (CE) Brazil, at a tertiary trauma referral hospital, between October 
2016 and July 2017. During this time, 37 floating knee patients were treated.   

All the patients diagnosed with floating knee and admitted to the hospital during 
the aforementioned period were included in the study. Diagnosis was conducted using 
anteroposterior radiographs (AR) and a profile of leg and femur bones of the affected 
limb. 

Exclusion criteria were patients with pre-fracture clinical comorbidities that 
could interfere in the incidence of complications (diabetes, thrombophilia, hemophilia, 
smoking), and prior history of thromboembolic events. 

A total of 30 patients who met the inclusion criteria participated in the study.  

The following data were collected from the patients´ medical charts: age, sex, 
side affected, Fraser's classification of fractures, trauma mechanism, type of fracture 
(open or closed), treatment used for fractures in urgent care, definitive treatment of 
fractures and complications (superficial infection, deep infection and DVT). 

Subcutaneous antithromboembolic prophylaxis was performed on all the 
patients, using enoxaparin (40mg/day) (30 patients) during hospitalization since the day 
of admission and maintained for 2 months, if the patient does not present any 
complications, according to the institution's protocol. DVT diagnosis was considered 
after clinical complaints (pain and rigidity) and confirmed with direct visualization of the 
venous thrombosis by Doppler ultrasound. 

The data were stored in the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences program 
(SPSS, NY, USA) version 18.0 and tabulated in Microsoft Excel 2007 (Microsoft, WA, 
USA), calculating the percentage frequency for the categorical variables. Associations 
between the variables were carried out using Pearson’s chi-squared test.  A p-value < 
0.05 was considered statistically significant in all the analyses. 
 
The study was approved by the Research Ethics Committee under protocol 
number 2.259.144 and written informed consent was obtained from the Medical Chart 
sector of the institution. 

Of the 30 patients assessed, 25 (83%) were men and 5 (17%) women. The most 
affected age range was between 21 and 30 years (36%). The dominant limb was affected 
in 17 (57%) patients.  

Fraser’s classification showed that most patients were classified as type I, that is, 
extra articular femur and tibia fractures (Graph 1). 

A total of 18 (60%) patients had open fractures, 16 (53%) in the tibia and 8 (26%) 
in the femur. Of the open tibia fractures, five were grade I Gustillo & Anderson8, seven 
grade II and six Grade IIIa.  Five of the open femur fractures were grade II and 3 grade 
IIIa. 

The most widely used emergency treatment was external fixation of the femur 
and tibia (25 patients = 83%). The most frequently used definitive treatment was a femur 
plate and external fixator in the tibia of 7 patients (23%) (Table 1). One of the patients 
suffered clinical complications due to severe infection and soft tissue necrosis, requiring 
suprapatellar amputation after venous Doppler ultrasound (negative for DVT). 

The average time to convert to the definitive treatment was 8.14 days, with a 
maximum and minimum of 22 and 2 days, respectively. 

The vast majority of patients (70%) suffered high-energy motorcycle accident 
trauma. (Graph 2) (Table 1). 

In the 30 cases, the average consolidation time was 19.4 (16-25) weeks for the 
femur and 16.2 (13-20) weeks for the tibia. There were 2 cases of pseudoarthrosis of the 
femur, 1 treated with an autologous graft of the iliac crest and 1 with bone transport, 
and 3 cases of pseudoarthrosis of the tibia, all treated with autologous graft and 
subsequent consolidation. 

Of the 30 patients studied, 14 (46%) suffered infectious complications, 9 (30%) 
superficial and 5 (16%) deep. Oral antibiotic treatment and local care were implemented 
for cases of superficial infection, while for deep infection, the procedure consisted of 
surgical debridement when S. aureus was identified in culture. Endovenous antibiotic 
therapy was applied for 4 weeks and oral for a further 2, guided by the antibiogram. 

One of the patients suffered vascular lesion of the popliteal artery at the moment 
of trauma, which was submitted to revascularization 3 hours after trauma. The same 
patient exhibited DVT and deep infection. 

Four patients presented with neurological lesion within the territory of the deep 
fibular nerve and recovered spontaneously after expectant treatment during outpatient 
follow-up. All were Fraser type IIC. 

Of the patients analyzed, Doppler ultrasound detected DVT in 5 of them (17%), 
cases 3,5,7,11,22 in Table 1 (p = 0.409). Of these, four cases were in a deep leg vein and 
one in a deep thigh vein. All the DVT cases were diagnosed between the second and 
fourth week post-trauma.  

All five patients affected by DVT were men (p = 0.209), traffic accident victims (p 
= 0.372) and treated in emergency with an external fixator (p = 0.570). In two of these 
patients, conversion to internal synthesis was precluded due to the severity of the skin 
injury (cases 3 and 22) and an external fixator was used as definitive treatment. The 
definitive treatment applied in three cases was plate/screw in the femur and external 
fixator in the tibia; osteosynthesis with retrograde intramedullary nail in the femur; and 
plate/screw in the tibia and external fixator, respectively. 

Of the patients with DVT, 80% were classified as Fraser I and 20% Fraser IIC 
(p=0.480). All of these patients suffered high-energy trauma, and 60% and 40% of the 
cases were motorcycle and automobile accident victims, respectively (p = 0.372). 

Clinical treatment in four of the cases consisted of full heparinization (60mg/day) 
and one was submitted to vena cava filter placement. In the converted cases for internal 
synthesis, surgery was performed after DVT diagnosis and treatment, and authorization 
by the vascular surgery team of the institution. 

We demonstrated that male patients classified as Fraser I are more likely to 
develop DVT and exhibit high indices of associated injury, primarily other fractures. 
These are uncommon injuries of unknown incidence. In addition, there is greater chance 
of other associated injuries in these patients, such as organ damage with possible risk of 
death9.  

In the present study, most of the patients were men in their 30s. This was also 
observed in another study, which found 238 cases of floating knee, and a predominance 
of men (85%) in their 30s (45%). 
The present study showed that most patients were victims of high-energy traffic 
accident trauma, primarily involving motorcycles. These data corroborate those of 
Rethnam et al.11, who found that 27 of 29 cases of floating knee were also traffic 
accident victims.  

In another retrospective study with 172 cases of floating knee, 71.5% were Fraser 
type I, 8.2% IIA, 11.2% IIB and 8.7% IIC12. A similar relation was found in the present 
study since most of the cases were classified as Fraser type I (63%). 

The emergency treatment used here in the vast majority of patients was external 
fixation, which may be due to the severity on arrival of the patient, since most were 
victims of high-energy trauma (Table 1). Similar findings were reported by Marco et al.13, 
in which 64.71% of patients with floating knee were treated with external fixation to 
stabilize fractures on arrival at the hospital.  

Kapoor et al.14 studied 125 patients with lower limb fractures, finding DVT 
positivity in 6 cases. The study consisted of 47 patients with periacetabular fractures, 
where 4 (8.51%) developed DVT and 8 sustained floating knee, 2 of whom developed 
DVT. These patients did not receive antithrombotic prophylaxis. The present study 
exhibited a DVT incidence of 17% in patients with floating knee, even with the use of 
antithrombotic prophylaxis.  

The variables analyzed (sex, dominant limb affected, Fraser classification, trauma 
mechanisms and emergency treatment) were not statistically significant as risk factors 
for developing DVT in patients with floating knee in the sample under study. 

Donath et al. reported the use of fondaparinux with a higher number of distal 
thrombotic events in the context of orthopedic surgery compared to enoxaparin as 
antithrombotic prophylaxis15. However, no statistical significance was found for this 
relation in the present study. 

Early diagnosis and treatment of DVT may directly interfere in decreasing 
complications related to this condition16. The five patients diagnosed by venous Doppler 
ultrasound exhibited no symptoms of pulmonary thromboembolism 

The main limitation of the investigation was the short follow-up, given that this 
is a retrospective study. The initial fixation method with an external fixator is also a 
negative factor due to prolonged restriction and immobilization17, in addition to not 
verifying the presence of other associated lesions, such as knee ligament injuries. We 
also emphasize that the incidence found may be higher, since the Doppler ultrasound 
was only used in symptomatic cases. 

Nevertheless, we presented a large number of cases of an infrequent lesion with 
a significant amount of data. We plan to conduct a prospective randomized study with 
a larger number of cases in the near future. 

Despite the fact that antithrombotic prophylaxis was used in these patients, 
there was a high incidence of deep vein thrombosis in those with floating knee. Fraser I 
fractures, being male and the non-dominant limb increases the likelihood of developing 
DVT. 
