By analyzing 25,671 journals largely absent from common journal counts, as well asWeb of Science and Scopus, this study demonstrates that scholarly communication ismore of a global endeavor than is commonly credited. These journals, employing theopen source publishing platform Open Journal Systems (OJS), have published 5.8million items; they are in 136 countries, with 79.9% in the Global South and 84.2%following the OA diamond model (charging neither reader nor author). A substantialproportion of journals operate in more than one language (48.3%), with researchpublished in a total of 60 languages (led by English, Indonesian, Spanish, andPortuguese). The journals are distributed across the social sciences (45.9%), STEM(40.3%), and the humanities (13.8%). For all their geographic, linguistic, and disciplinarydiversity, 1.2% are indexed in the Web of Science and 5.7% in Scopus. On the otherhand, 1.0% are found in Cabells Predatory Reports, while 1.4% show up in Beall’squestionable list. This paper seeks to both contribute and historically situate expandedscale and diversity of scholarly publishing in the hope that this recognition may assisthumankind in taking full advantage of what is increasingly a global research enterprise.

In 2018, Philip G. Altbach and Hans de Wit, two leading scholars of higher education atBoston College, published “Too Much Academic Research Is Being Published” inUniversity World News. In making their case, Altbach and de Wit point out that although“no one knows how many scientific journals there are... several estimates point toaround 30,000” (2018).1 Finding the number excessive, they declare “a crisis inacademic publishing” involving “too much pressure on top journals” and “the rise ofpredatory journals and publishers that publish low or marginal quality research.” Theyrecommend steps be taken to reduce the amount of research published.2 The analysisin this article not only challenges such journal estimates but calls for a recognition of theGlobal South’s research commitment and engagement. The source of this analysis is25,671 journals that are using the open source editorial management and publishingplatform Open Journals Systems (OJS), first released by the Public Knowledge Project(PKP) in 2002.3 Our association with PKP, as authors of this paper, is noted in theCompeting Interests statement at the end of this paper.

Earlier studies of what we are calling JUOJS (journals using OJS) located 9,828journals in 2015 (Alperin, Stranack, Garnett, 2016). A survey of 2,114 of JUOJS staffmembers found 97.8% of them to be open access (OA), with 13.6% utilizing ArticleProcessing Charges (APC) to provide OA (Alperin, Stranack & Hanson, 2017; see alsoEdgar & Willinsky, 2010). These results suggest that 84.2% of the JUOJS are “OAdiamond” (which neither charge authors nor readers for access). This result can becompared to a more recent study which placed JUOJS at 60% of OA diamond journals,among “at least 17,000, but likely up to 29,000, OA diamond journals” (Bosman et al.,2021, p. 93). Of relevance to this paper’s section on indexing, Bosman and coauthorsconclude that “even though they are well embedded in academic structures, OAdiamond journals struggle to be properly integrated into the ecosystem of scholarlypublications” (p. 84).

This “struggle to be properly integrated” has a postcolonial history that Altbachaddressed in the “University as Center and Periphery” some four decades ago (1981).The “peripheral universities" of the “Third World,” he noted, are “basically distributors ofknowledge... dependent on the central institutions for innovation and for direction.” Their“special problems with developing research capabilities” include “few outlets forscholarship, creative writing, and research reports by Third World intellectuals” as“publishers are largely uninterested in Third World authors.”4 Altbach saw this powerful"colonial educational heritage” a form of “neocolonialism” not easily overcome: “Theodds against a fully autonomous and effective publishing enterprise being developed inthe [African] continent are high” (1976, p. 461). The universities there, he further warns,“not only have to confront the reality of the historically and economically based power ofthe industrialized nations but also… the widespread desire by the industrial nations tomaintain their dominant positions” (1981).5

The pervasiveness of this “intellectual imperialism” – as Syed Hussien Alatas atthe University of Malaya has framed this center-periphery pattern, beginning in the late1960s (2000) – has also given rise to an “academic dependency” theory of relevance tothis paper.6 Its leading scholar, Syed Farid Alatas, at the National University ofSingapore and the University of Malaya, writes of multiple dependencies afflicting GlobalSouth researchers, including a “dependency on recognition” that leads to “manyscholars [being] torn between satisfying the requirements of publishing in high ranked‘international’ journals, particularly those listed in the [Web of Science], and publishinglocally in their own languages” (2022, p. 20). The JUOJS attest to a certain break withthe recognition dependency, just as these journals address what the Kenyan novelistand essayist Ngũgĩ wa Thiong'o identified as a “need to move the center from itsassumed location in the West to a multiplicity of spheres in all cultures of the world,”which Thiong'o framed as part of a “vast decolonization process” (1991, p. xiv, 3).7

In the first decade of the twenty-first century, Ezra Ondari-Okemwa, aninformation science scholar at Machakos University, noted how the region’s shortfalls in“the technological capability to support electronic knowledge transfer and scholarlypublishing” were matched by the regional publications’ “lack [of] visibility” (2007). Whatthis means for researchers is summed by PLOS publisher Alison Muddit: “The need toachieve credibility and visibility within the global research system” means researchers inthe Global South choosing “between a desire to strengthen local platforms and outletsthat better serve local needs and feeling pulled to ‘play the game’ in which norms havebeen set by the Global North” (2020; see also Alperin and Rozemblum, 2017).

Against this array of challenges, this paper seeks to bring to light how editors,publishers, and researchers around the world, and especially in the Global South, havetaken advantage of an open source publishing platform to create, against Altbach’sodds, “an effective scholarly publishing enterprise.” The scale of this enterprise will bemapped across the principal dimensions of scholarly publishing: (a) country and region,(b) language, (c) discipline, and (d) indexing. By counting those whose research has toooften been discounted, this paper demonstrates the extent to which scholarly publishingin the Global South is shifting the assumed center to “a multiplicity of spheres.” This isenriching what is thought of as “the literature” across the disciplines, although its fullgenerative potential for research is only beginning to be recognized and realized.

The JUOJS employ an optional PKP Beacon, released with the software in 2015, thatenables PKP to notify OJS users of security patches and other software upgrades.8 Thebeacon also transmits indexing information about the journal, including the journal’s title,ISSN, number of items published, titles, and abstracts. This study employed a standardfor “active” journals of five items a year, set by the Directory of Open Access Journals(DOAJ, 2020).9 The resulting publicly available data set for 2020 was 25,671 journals or36.5% of the 70,214 OJS beacons operating at the time (Khanna et al., 2021). Thegrowth in journals using OJS over the previous decade has shown signs of increasing(Figure 1). The journals in the data set averaged 38.1 items in 2020, for a total of996,000 items, while these journals have published a total 5.4 million items since theirinception. An OJS installation, from which multiple journals can be generated, is host to

A journal’s country of origin of a journal through a three step process. First, we used theISSN (International Standard Serial Number) of a journal to query the LOC ISSN lookupAPI for location, which provides us with a MARC code. This MARC code can then bemapped to a country (Raoni, 2021). MARC codes that map to within-country regions orstates are handled manually to reflect corresponding countries. Second, we extract thetop level domains from the journal URLs and map them to their corresponding ISO3166-1 alpha-2 country codes. Third, we geolocated the IP address of the journal hostusing a weekly updated copy of the GeoLite2 Free Geolocation Data.10

The beacon data revealed JUOJS in 136 countries (while a country was not identified for20 journals). Indonesia leads with 11,535 (45.0%) journals, followed by Brazil with 2,653(10.3%).11 The top ten countries account for 74.6% of the total (Figure 2).12 Yet theglobal distribution of the journals is widespread with pockets of more intense use (Figure3).

The economic distribution of JUOJS was analyzed using the four World Bankincome groups (Figure 4). By gross national income (GNI) per capita, 81.1% of theJUOJS are found in the World Bank’s middle income countries, with the 27 low incomecountries accounting for only 53 JUOJS (0.2%). This amounts to 81.6% of the journalscoming from countries associated, by national income, with the Global South (Haug,2021). From a geopolitical perspective, using the five United Nations Regional Groups,78.1% of the JUOJS are located in three UN regional groups associated with GlobalSouth (Dados & Connell, 2012): Asia-Pacific States (54.7%), Latin American andCaribbean States (21%), and African States (2.4%) (Figure 5).

To determine the languages of publication for the JUOJS, we ran Google’s CompactLanguage Detector v3 (gcld3) on the 100 most recent articles in the ISSN-verifiedsubset of JUOJS. Gcld3 is a freely available pre-trained neural classifier and has abuilt-in flag for language predictions that indicates when the predicted languageclassification exceeds an optimal probability threshold. Only reliable languageclassifications were retained for each journal. Then, the most frequent languageclassification for each journal was designated as the journal’s primary language ofpublishing. If gcld3 classified a given journal’s article abstracts as being in multiplelanguages (i.e., with at least 5 articles per language), then the journal was designated asmultilingual. Finally, a variety of heuristic checks were applied to verify the primarylanguage of publishing for each journal, for example, by checking predicted languagesagainst top-level domains, which resulted in the semi-manual correction of 478 journals.Two relatively under-resourced languages, Balochi and Faroese, are currentlyunsupported by gcld3 and were instead discovered by searching top-level domains.

Language detection software indicated that research was being published in 60languages by the JUOJS, for which an example journal was found by manually verifyingeach language (Table 1). The language classifications for all ISSN-verified JUOJS (n =22,561), were shared with Google Scholar to extend the scope of its indexing of journalsto additional languages.13

Close to half of the JUOJS published articles primarily in English (49.7%), withthe top ten languages accounting for 97.0% of the titles (Figure 6). By comparison,Scopus has publications in 40 languages, with the proportion of documents (rather thanjournals) in English at 92.6%, followed by 2.8% in Chinese and 1.3%% in Spanish(Vera-Baceta, Thelwall & Kousha, 2019).

The high level of linguistic diversity among JUOJS calls into question thecommon linguistic assumption that “English is the language of science,” as a recentheadline in Nature read (Elnathan, 2021). The reign of English in research andscholarship only began to take hold in the latter half of the twentieth-century, aftersharing the spotlight earlier with French and German; and while medieval Latin servedas the language of learning in the West, the influx of learning from the Islamic world inArabic, through the twelfth-century translation movement, made all the difference(Hunter-Konos, 2015, Willinsky, 2017, pp. 117-152).

Today, English hegemony is facing challenges in the name of “bibliodiversity,”which Monica Berger, New York City College of Technology, places at the center ofdecolonizing the OA movement in research (2021; Shearer, 2019). A “positionstatement” on this question of research and language has been issued by the Chileanscholar Federico Navarro, La Universidad de O'Higgins, and eleven other faculty fromaround the globe, “challenge(s) assumptions made about the use of English as a ‘linguafranca’ in scientific-academic contexts,” by identifying its deleterious effects onknowledge production, while arguing for “why we, as research communities in differentfields and regions, should use multiple languages and varieties to promote transnationaldialogue in scientific-academic contexts” (2022). Similarly, Suresh Canagarajah, at PennState, expresses his hope this bibliodiversity amounts to a “gradual chipping away atpower, to decolonize writing and scholarship as diverse communicative spaces, whichwill complement the parallel activism for large scale institutional and policy changes”(2022, p. 20). The commitment to such change within scholarly communication isreflected in the international array of signatories to the 2019 Helsinki Initiative onMultilingualism.

While the research hegemony of English is present among the JUOJS, anotherlinguistic feature of this collection is that 48.3% publish in more than one language(Figure 7). The relationship among the four leading languages can be tracked amongmono- and multi-lingual journals (Figure 8). While monolingual English languagejournals represent the largest segment at 6,651 titles (indicated in by single dot underthe first column), the notable bibliodiversity among the JUOJS appears in the nextcolumn with Indonesian-English bilingual journals with 4,431 titles, andPortuguese-Spanish-English trilingual journals with 550 titles. It is also worth noting thatthe use of English may be overestimated, as it is common for titles and abstracts, onwhich the language analysis relies, to be translated from other languages into English.As well, articles do, on occasion, employ multiple languages in their text, for example,Spanish and Castilian, or Bahasa Indonesia and Javanese.

To assess JUOJS’ research coverage, the title and abstract of the five most recentarticles published in the ISSN-verified journals were first concatenated, then passed asinputs to a neural field of study classifier trained on English-language data (Weber et al.,2020). The use of this classifier required the translation of all titles and abstracts intoEnglish, for which we used the Ubiquitous Knowledge Project’s EasyNMT. The outputsof the classifier are distributions of likelihood over all classes, meaning that it supportsmultidisciplinary classification. But for ease of reporting, each journal was assigned thesingle most probable field of study label according to the Australian and New ZealandStandard Research Classification (ANZSRC). This schema was preferred over othersbecause of the availability of the data set used to train the neural classifier, examples inwhich were labeled according to ANZSRC (Weber et al., 2020). ANZSRC fields map tothe OECD’s Fields of Science and Technology (FOS), but differ from those embodied bythe National Science Foundation’s seven research area directorates. Differences aremainly found in STEM fields, especially in the pure sciences. The classifier mitigates thisproblem of comparison by assigning basic labels such as Chemical and PhysicalSciences, which the NSF classification then groups into broader research fields.

The disciplinary distribution of journals reveals that social science research is theleading area among journals, although the STEM fields – led by the medical and healthsciences, followed by engineering and technology – also play a major role by journalcount (Figure 8). The STEM presence is notable where the expectation is that researchconducted beyond the center represents a degree of cultural diversity that will occupythe main body of research activity (Figure 9). Where the social sciences and humanitiesare assumed to have a local significance that can be well served by researchers on site,the “universality” of the sciences frees them up for gravitating toward the center, withthese results suggesting a more distributed basis for research in the sciences,technologies, engineering, and mathematics (STEM).

To compare the JUOJS disciplinary breakdown to the profile found in Scopus(with an overlap of less than 4% between them; see below), one finds a mixed picture.On the one hand, Scopus has a higher proportion of titles in mathematics and medicineand health sciences, while the set of JUOJS have a higher proportion in education andlanguage, communication and culture (Table 2). Yet in other disciplinary areas thejournal coverage of disciplines is roughly comparable between the JUOJS and Scopustwo sets, such as economics, engineering and computer science. One can imaginemore advanced citational studies to determine the extent to which journals in these twosets draw on the other in their shared disciplinary interests.

The visibility and circulation of the JUOJS were assessed by determining the presenceof these journals in 11 research indexes, directories, and lists. The analysis of the Webof Science Citation Reports and Cabells Predatory Reports involved drawing onStanford University Library licensing agreements, with Cabells kindly determining theJUOJS in its database, based on its use of our data set. EBSCOHost, Scopus,OpenAlex, DOAJ, and Beall’s List make their respective journal lists publicly available.Bianca Kramer ascertained the number of JUOJS in ROAD (2022), while SerpApigenerously assisted in assessing Google Scholar’s indexing of JUOJS. With each of theindexes, we then assess how well JUOJS are represented in the index by assessingoverlap based on matched ISSNs, and/or matched journal URLs and domain names. The specific matching criteria used for each resource are also reported with Table 3.

As early as 1998, Ann María Cetto and Octavio Alonso-Gamboa, at the NationalAutonomous University of Mexico (UNAM), raised the marginalization of Global Southresearch in the principal journal indexes (Cetto & Alonso-Gamboa, 1998). They foundthat the Web of Science’s coverage of scholarly publishing in Latin America and theCaribbean amounted to 0.5% of the journals indexed (p. 114). Cetto andAlonso-Gamboa were inspired to join forces with others in the region to form Latindex in1997, which currently indexes 24,486 journals, as a way of countering what hadotherwise been constructed, in Cetto’s words, as “the large periphery of the presentworld system” (1997, p. 40).14

A quarter century after the Cetto and Alonso-Gamboa study, the Web of ScienceCitation Reports includes 1.2% of the JUOJS (Table 3).15 The coverage of JUOJS inEBSCO and Scopus is only marginally better. Our concern here is with the extent towhich these three databases are commonly assumed to constitute the scientificliterature, with researchers turning to them to write literature reviews and analyzecharacteristics of scholarly communication, for example, in the Global South (e.g.,Cortés, Guix & Carbonell, 2021).

On the other hand, a new generation of indexes, such as Dimensions andOpenAlex, do much better. They cover 54.3% and 63.8% of the JUOJS respectively, byrelying on automated aggregation of open resources (such as Microsoft AcademicGraph, Crossref, Unpaywall, DOAJ, ORCID, and PubMed). Finally, 88.3% of the JUOJSare indexed in Google Scholar. This is a result, in good part, of its lead engineer AnuragAcharya reaching out repeatedly to PKP, beginning in 2004, to improve its indexing ofJUOJS through improvements on both sides. This suggests the deliberate effort neededto start to overcome the legacy of “the large periphery,” as Cetto put it.

Google Scholar data affords further insight into the JUOJS by offering article-levelcitation data (although by OJS installation domain rather than by journal). The 22,679JUOJS in Google Scholar (June 2022) were hosted on 8,548 OJS domains, with 2.7journals on average. Each identified domain was accompanied by the first page ofsearch results, with citation counts for roughly the top ten articles by citation (Figure 10).This revealed that 34 (0.4%) of the 8,548 journal domains had over 10,000 citationsamong their first ten articles. 565 journal domains (6.6%) had over 1,000 citations, and1,015 journal domains (11.9%) had over 500 citations. But then 547 domains (6.4%) hadno citations on the first page.16 The overall mean for the JUOJS’ first page of GoogleScholar search results is 358.8 citations (median: 50.0).

As a further but still preliminary analysis of citation practices surrounding JUOJS,the most-cited articles in English, Indonesian, and Portuguese were examined for theircitation by JUOJS or by other publications. For the leading English-language article,which has 16,432 citations and is published in the Journal of Statistical Software, 95% ofthe articles citing it come from outside of JUOJS (Table 4). Judging by this one verysuccessful article, the journal is contributing to the broader research literature. This isless the case with the top-cited article in Indonesian, published in Jurnal Ekonomi danpendidikan, and the top-cited article in Portuguese, published in Outra travessia. Thesetwo articles are cited less frequently than the English leader, with 1,321 citations and1,408 respectively, with those citations coming to a far greater extent from JUOJS. Theleading Indonesian article had 73.2% of its citing articles in JUOJS, while for the leadingPortuguese article the proportion was 77.7%. This likely reflects the prevalent roleplayed by JUOJS in these two languages, although still roughly one-fifth of the citingarticles come from sources other than JUOJS. Much more systematic work is needed onthis question of citational dynamics in recalibrating scholarly communication, and thiswill be the subject of future studies.

As noted above, Latindex is a regional index, which draws on bibliographic data from 17national resource centers across Latin America, the Caribbean, and the IberianPeninsula. Of the 24,486 journals indexed in Latindex, 4,208 (17.2%) are JUOJS. Onthe other hand, fully two-thirds of the JUOJS that are published within thisIberoamerican region are indexed in Latindex.

The Directory of Open Access Journals (DOAJ) is an independent organizationsupported by libraries, publishers, and others, which accepts journals based on athorough review of their adherence to scholarly standards. The Directory of OpenAccess Scholarly Resources is operated by the International Center for the registrationof serial publications that manages ISSN (International Standard Serial Number)registration and accepts data from related sources, such as DOAJ, Latindex, andScopus, which accounts for the greater number of journals it indexes and thecorresponding increase in JUOJS that it indexes.

The University of Colorado Denver librarian Jeffrey Beall’s designation of “potential,possible, or probable predatory scholarly OA publisher[s],” for which he began to keep alist in 2008, has played an outsize role in the discounting of Global South journals. Whilewe have addressed this issue in some detail elsewhere (Khanna & Willinsky, in press),suffice it to state here that that there are two prominent lists of so-called “predatory”journals: Beall managed his publicly available list until 2017, at which time Cabellsbegan to offer its subscription service Predatory Reports.17 Beall’s 2017 list contains 366JUOJS (1.4% of the JUOJS), while Cabells’ Predatory Report has 237 (1.0), with the twolists sharing 82 JUOJS in common.

The relevance of this analysis for this study has to do with recent and repeatedassertions that “predatory journals are a global threat” (Oviedo-García, 2021; Bagat,2021; Shrestha, Timsina, & Subedi, 2021; Grudniewicz et al., 2019; Strong 2019), withother articles conflating predatory with OA publishing (Krawczyk & Kulczycki, 2021). Weare no less opposed, to be clear, to deceptive and dishonest journals, wherever they arepublished.18 Yet the way this is being framed as a global research threat plays into theperipheralizing world system, bemoaned by Cetto (1997) in the last century, while doinglittle to address the problem. What might be more effective, and less damaging to globalscience, is to set a publishing standard for the transparency of journal integrity, for whichwe’ve begun running initial tests (Willinsky, 2022).

This paper does not answer the question of how many journals there are in the world. Itestablishes, however, that the several estimates of 30,000, noted above, fall woefullyshort. Scholarly publishing is taking place on far more of a global scale than iscommonly recognized in such estimates, as well as in studies that rely on the Web ofScience Citation Index and Scopus. Dismissing this global scale out of hand, as toomuch research or predatory publishing, seems a less than scientific approach. Rather,there are grounds for beginning to recalibrate scholarly communication on a decidedlyexpanded, but no less rigorous, scale. This can only help the world take advantage of ayet to be fully grasped growth of the research enterprise. This growth is about more thanjournal counts. It concerns significant bibliodiversity in scholarly communicationreflected, in this case, by the 60 languages in which research is published from 136countries. It involves changes in scholarly communication economics. There are opensource alternatives to corporate domination of publishing services relied upon by profitand non-profit publishers.19 The open source platform investigated in this study can besaid, for example, to be driving an OA diamond model of equitable access for authors,users, and readers across the full range of academic disciplines.20

Still, this study represents preliminary rescaling work in scholarly communication.It leaves many questions unanswered on how JUOJS operate within the larger world ofresearch. How are the researchers they publish engaging and contributing to the work ofothers? The citation patterns need to be mapped to learn about how this work interactswithin and beyond this set of journals. Is this work contributing, for example, to theimproved efficiency that has been observed in research’s circulation and use.21 Casestudies are called on JUOJS’ influence on policy-making and professional practice. Suchinvestigations will serve the 2030 goal set by Research4Life, in an encouraging accordamong its 160 “publisher partners,” which is to raise the “profile… and support for theGlobal South research publishing industry” (Our vision, 2022, p. 26).

Yet there is something more at issue with the global scale of this publishingactivity that aligns with the point made Achille Mbembe at the University of theWitwatersrand, in paying tribute to Ngũgĩ wa Thiong'o’s re-centering project of the lastcentury, that “the decolonizing project is back on the agenda worldwide” (2019, p. 18,original emphasis). Mbembe envisions this agenda transforming universities into“platforms for the redistribution of different kinds of knowledges” (p. 7, originalemphasis). This, too, is a part of what we have found here, linguistically andgeopolitically. It suggests that another world of scholarly communication – more broadlyglobal, diverse, and inclusive – is not just possible or on the agenda.22 It is alreadyunderway for the benefit of all.

The authors wish to thank Anurag Acharya, Bianca Kramer, Ron Naoko, Kathy Kerns,and Emma Uhl, as well as SerpApi and Cabells, for their assistance in the preparation ofthis paper.

As acknowledged, the authors are associated with the Public Knowledge Project,developer of Open Journal Systems (JB and SK serve as research associates, whileJPA and JW are Co-Scientific Directors).

This research was supported by the Graduate School of Education and the KhoslaFamily Professorship at Stanford University.

The study’s dataset is available (Khanna et al., 2021), while Jupyter Notebooks (Ball,2022; Khanna, 2022) containing the analysis code have been linked to thecorresponding figures presenting the data.