Viewpoint
Physical Exercise in Patients with Heart Disease and in the General 
Population in Times of Coronavirus
Ricardo Stein1
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul,1 Porto Alegre, RS – Brazil
I will begin this text without speaking about exercise. I want 
to emphasize that individuals with chronic diseases, such as 
hypertension, heart failure, different types of myocardiopathy, 
and some forms of arrhythmia are at an increased risk of fatal 
outcomes after contracting SARS-COV-2 and developing the 
infection denominated COVID-19. In the same manner, those 
who have undergone mechanical or surgical revascularization, 
individuals with prosthetic valves (whether biological or 
metallic), pacemakers, implanted defibrillators, or other 
devices, as well as those with some forms of congenital heart 
disease are also part of a higher risk group.1
First point: The patients described above are definitely 
at a higher risk and they are part of the risk group 
regardless of age.* 
*Note: Like individuals with heart disease, the elderly, 
immunosuppressed patients, and individuals with some 
chronic diseases, such as diabetes and pulmonary disease, 
are also at an increased risk of being infected.
•	 This raises the question, “Regarding exercise in individuals 
with heart disease and in the general population, how should 
we proceed? There is a consensus that regular practice of 
physical exercise should continue, even in isolation at home; 
this position is clear among cardiologists, exercise physicians, 
and other specialists. Naturally, on one hand this may seem 
difficult, but, on the other, the increase in available time will 
do away with the excuse that “I don’t have time.” The week 
continues to be made up of 168 hours. Is it not possible to 
dedicate five half-hour periods, at least, to some type of 
exercise at home?
Second point: Exercising at home is indicated for the 
following two reasons: a) It follows the main criterion of 
care against SARS-COV-2 infection that causes COVID-19; 
b) it is healthy. 
•	 This, however, brings up another question: If I feel well, 
why can’t I exercise in the street, in public squares, in 
gyms, or in condominiums? If we think in individual terms, 
going out or running on the condominium treadmill does 
not appear to be problematic. However,  social and 
epidemiological reasoning indicates that the chance 
of there being a crowd increases and this goes against 
specialists’ recommendations. Imagine if everyone 
decided to go to the sidewalk next to the beach or to the 
park to jog at the same time… It would be wonderful… 
for the virus!!!
Third point: In the risk-benefit ratio, specialists recommend 
not leaving home to exercise during this pandemic moment.
•	 Another question seems important to me: If I have signs 
and/or symptoms, should I exercise? No!!! Exercise should 
not be practiced in the presence of signs and/or symptoms, 
neither in this nor in any other situation of infection. 
The best thing to do is rest until you have fully recovered.
Fourth point: If you are symptomatic, do not exercise, not 
even at home. After you have recovered, return to practicing 
as indicated. 
•	 Another relevant point deals with previous history of 
exercise. It would be great if everyone were physically 
active and inactivity were a minor issue. Some people think 
that because they are active or athletic they are immune 
to SARS-COV-2. Not at all!!! High performance athletes 
have already contracted COVID-19 and recovered or are 
in recovery; some have even been hospitalized. 
Fifth point: Active or athletic individuals should follow 
the same precautions as the rest of the population, as they 
are at the same risk of contracting the disease as any other 
human being.
•	 Many of us had childhoods filled with physical activity. 
We played hula hoop, jump rope, hopscotch, and hide 
and seek, as well as other games that we still remember 
and that remind us a time with no pandemics but that 
will inexorably never return. Faced with the current 
scenario, why not take advantage of this time with your 
children; reiterating: make the most of this time with 
your children, which was something many of us could 
not imagine was possible a few weeks ago!!! Drag them 
out of bed or off the sofa; encourage them to give 
WhatsApp, games, and Netflix a break. Go play!!!
Sixth point: Return to the past. Encourage your children to 
be less sedentary. According to the World Health Organization, 
it is ideal that adults dedicate 150 minutes to exercise weekly 
and that younger individuals exercise for at least 300 minutes 
weekly.2 In short, integration of the family promotes the 
family’s own health.
•	 Not all physical activity is exercise, but all exercise is a 
form of physical activity. There are countless examples, 
sweeping, ironing, cleaning and/or vacuuming, gardening, 
Mailing Address: Ricardo Stein •
Rua Ramiro Barcelos, 2350 - Serviço de Fisiatria/Térreo.  
Postal Code 90035-903, Porto Alegre, RS – Brazil
E-mail: kuqui.r@gmail.com
Manuscript received April 03, 2020, revised manuscript April 08, 2020, 
accepted April 08, 2020
Keywords
Coronavirus; COVID-19; Exercise; Physical Activity; Life 
Style; Sedentarism; Cardiovascular Diseases; Risk Factors; 
Healthy Diet; Residence
DOI: https://doi.org/10.36660/abc.20200281
Viewpoint
Stein
Exercise and Coronavirus
Arq Bras Cardiol. 2020; [online].ahead print, PP.0-0
working in the yard, going up and down the stairs (with 
precaution if the stairs in an apartment building are being 
used by other residents at the same time), and others.2
Seventh point: Intensify physical activity at home on a 
daily-to-day basis. You and your family will have a more active, 
healthier, and more productive lifestyle.  
•	 Sexual activity is a form of physical exercise/activity. 
For many, it is the most pleasurable one. In times 
of isolation-coronavirus, this is a general concern. 
We certainly do not have scientific data, but logic leads 
us to think that distancing should come before desire, 
that common sense should be more prevalent than the 
pleasure principle.
Eighth point: Unfortunately, it is recommended that 
sexual activity involving hugging, touching, kissing, and 
penetration be avoided (in the scenario of occasional 
sexual activity, of course). Masturbation, the use of vibrators 
and erotic toys is not contraindicated. If objects are to be 
shared, it seems to me that they should be washed with 
water and soap and/or 70% alcohol gel (this is merely an 
intuitive deduction, given that there are no studies testing 
hypotheses on this subject).
•	 Readers of the Archives, regarding this theme, it would 
certainly be possible to list several other points, but it 
seems to me that at the end of these indications what is 
most important is to emphasize that physical inactivity in 
a treacherous enemy. Its effects typically do not manifest 
in an acute manner as is the case with SARS-COV-2, 
whose effects need to be combated with emergency 
health measures based on the best scientific evidence. 
In turn, by negatively affecting the cardiovascular, 
respiratory, metabolic, muscular, and immune systems, 
physical inactivity is also very harmful. In conclusion, the 
previous eight points were written in order to provoke 
reflection that at this moment we must live within 
the confines imposed by this new global order that is 
restrictive, but not limiting.
Author contributions 
Conception and design of the research, Acquisition of 
data, Analysis and interpretation of the data, Writing of 
the manuscript and Critical revision of the manuscript for 
intellectual content: Stein R.
Potential Conflict of Interest 
No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article 
was reported. 
Sources of Funding 
There were no external funding sources for this study. 
Study Association 
This study is not associated with any thesis or dissertation work.
Ethics approval and consent to participate 
This article does not contain any studies with human 
participants or animals performed by any of the authors.
1.	
Zheng YY, Ma YT, Zhang JY, Xie X. COVID-19 and the cardiovascular system.
Nat Rev Cardiol. 2020 Mar 5,17:259-60.
2.	
Ferreira Jr M, Lantieri CJB, Saraiva JF, De Angelis K. Atividade física 
durante a pandemia de coronavirus [Citado em 05 abr 2020]. 
Disponível em: https://portal.cardiol.br/post/atividade-fisica-durante-
a-pandemia-de-coronavirus 
References
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License
