In order to contribute to knowledge of the epidemiology of American cutaneous 
leishmaniasis (ACL) among indigenous people living in sylvatic regions, we studied the sand fly 
fauna collected in areas of disease transmission in the Brazilian Amazon. Our two datasets 
reported here are comprised of occurrence data for sand flies from the Suruwaha Indigenous 
Land in the state of Amazonas collected between 2012-1013, and the Wajãpi Indigenous Land 
in the state of Amapá collected between 2013-2014. Sand flies were collected using unbaited 
CDC-like light traps at various sites within each study area and were identified to species-level 
by taxonomists with expertise in Amazonian fauna. A total of 4,646 records are reported: 
1,428 from the Suruwaha and 3,218 from the Wajãpi. These records will contribute to a better 
understanding of ACL transmission dynamics, as well as the distribution of insect vectors, in 
these areas. 

Leishmaniases are diseases caused by various species of the protozoan parasite genus 
Leishmania, which are transmitted between humans, and wild and domestic vertebrate 
animals, by the bites of blood-feeding female sand flies [1]. In Brazil, American cutaneous 
leishmaniasis (ACL) is an endemic disease, but little is known about its impact on indigenous 
human populations, especially those living in more remote areas with little contact with non-
indigenous people living outside their territorial lands. In order to investigate the sand fly 
fauna present during outbreaks of ACL among the Suruwaha and the Wajãpi indigenous people 
that occurred between 2012-2014, we carried out fieldwork to collect these insects and 
identify potential vectors. Insects were identified by keys available in the literature [3,4] by 
experienced taxonomists. 

Our datasets are comprised of sand fly occurrence data from: (i) the Suruwaha 
Indigenous Land (SIL) in the south of the state of Amazonas collected between 2012-1013; and 
(ii) the Wajãpi Indigenous Land (WIL) in the state of Amapá collected between 2013-2014.  The 
data sets reported here are the metadata for each individual sand fly specimen collected 
during the fieldwork and include 41 Darwin Core Standard (DwC) terms [5] available for the 
Suruwaha dataset and 39 for the Wajãpi dataset. All mandatory fields are present and have 
gone through screening in the FIOCRUZ IPT, metadata fields are also available on the online 
pages. 

Our dataset include fields describing for each individual sand fly specimen their: (i) 
taxonomy (kingdom, phylum, class, order, family, genus, specificEpithet, verbatimIdentification, 
infraspecificEpithet, scientificName, 
scientificNameAuthorship, taxonRank), (ii) collection 
details, including the collectors (recordedBy: Shimabukuro PHF; Stumpp RGAV; Medeiros MES.; 
Alves DRC; Moreno ES; Freire M P; Nascimento LOC), the collection date, trapping method, trap 
identification number, collection site description (verbatimEventDate, eventTime, habitat, 
samplingProtocol), (iii) geolocation data (stateProvince, county, 
locality, 
locationRemarks, verbatimLatitude, verbatimLongitude, decimalLatitude, decimalLongitude, 
geodeticDatum), (iv) catalogue reference data (otherCatalogNumbers). Our data is available in 
the Sistema de Informação sobre a Biodiversidade Brasileira (SiBBr), an online platform that 
integrates data and information about biodiversity and ecosystems, and is the Brazilian Node of 
the Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF), an internationally-recognized resource for 
collation of biological occurrence data [4], where our data set has been submitted, and is 
publically available for use by others (fiocruz_suruwaha_01: https://doi.org/10.15468/28xvr7 
and fiocruz_wajapi_01: https://doi.org/10.15468/gt29ub). 

ACL is a serious public health problem in Brazil, with 203,406 cases were recorded 
between 2010 and 2020, with the administrative North Region of the country, which includes 
the Amazon biome, currently accounting for 42% of all cases recorded within Brazil [6]. 

Health and disease conditions among indigenous people in Brazil are poorly known. 
There is a huge gap in government databases on morbidity, mortality, disease notification, etc, 
which prevent the construction of the most basic socio-demographic and health indicators. 
However, the few studies on the public health of populations of indigenous people in Brazil 
show a situation of marginalization and vulnerability, which translate into low quality of life, 
difficulty in accessing services in general, and low health indicators [7]. 

In addition, the different transmission patterns of ACL make the disease difficult to 
control, and understand, especially in the Brazilian Amazon, which has the greatest diversity of 
the species of parasites of the genus Leishmania, their insect vectors and vertebrate hosts, in 
the Neotropical region [1]. 

Our two datasets are comprised of sand fly occurrence data from fieldwork 
undertaken by the authors during the ACL outbreaks in) the SIL and WIL. 

Transmission of ACL south of the Amazon River system is poorly understood [8,9]. 
Although it has often been stated that human Leishmania infection is either rare or absent 
south of the Negro and Amazon Rivers [8,10], the incidence of leishmaniasis in humans in 
some of these areas is equivalent to the incidence at north of the Negro and Amazon Rivers 
[9,11]. Guerra et al. (2011) [12] described the epidemiology of mucosal leishmaniasis (ML) 
south of the Amazon River, and not only found a high prevalence of this form of the disease, 
but also a distribution of Leishmania species similar to the distribution found north of the 
Amazon River. However, the etiologic agent of cutaneous leishmaniasis (CL) has not been 
identified, and the source of sylvatic infection and the vectors involved in transmission are not 
known south of the Amazon River system [8,13]. 

The Suruwaha are comprised of a population of approximately 170 people [14] whose 
only contact with non-indigenous people is through health workers and members of FUNAI 
(the Fundação Nacional do Índio; the Brazilian government agency responsible for protecting 
indigenous people). The Suruwaha live in a very remote location, far from urban areas and 
they manufacture of utensils, being agriculture and hunting the main activities of this people.  

Entomological research within the SIL was carried out by us in order to contribute to 
the understanding of the transmission dynamics of ACL as there was an increase in the number 
of cases of ACL recorded among the Suruwaha between 2010 and 2012. Our investigation 
found that this increase was likely related to the distribution to the entire community of 
flashlights in late 2010, as requested by the Suruwaha themselves. This seems to be the main 
cause of the increase in ACL, as it led to changes in the hunting habits of the Suruwaha from 
strictly diurnal to nocturnal, and coincides with the generally crepuscular and nocturnal biting 
activity of the blood-feeding female sand flies that transmit ACL. 

The SIL is very remote and our entomological survey was performed by different teams 
to take advantage of routine operations by FUNAI. A total of 1,428 sand fly specimens were 
identified to either genus or species-level. Ten genera and 33 species were collected, of which 
the genera Trichophoromyia was predominant (57%), followed by Psychodopygus (20%) and 
Nyssomyia (5%). Among the most abundant species were T. ubiquitalis (25%), T. octavioi (9%) 
and Ps. davisi (8%). 

The Wajãpi are a group of about 1,200 people [15], distributed in 80 small villages 
scattered throughout their territory. All families subsist by agriculture, fishing, hunting and 
gathering, periodically changing the location of their villages to allow the ecological recovery of 
the areas they have occupied. Access to the villages can be via the road, rivers and streams 
that cross their territory, as well as open trails through the forest. The resumption of the 
traditional model of Wajãpi occupation and dispersal for territorial exploitation, which 
maintains the quality of life of the people and, at the same time, guarantees territorial 
surveillance was essential to guarantee the pattern of abundance that the Wajãpi consider 
adequate [16]. In the last 10 years, the activity of large mining companies, and the building of 
hydroelectric plants, in the environment surrounding the WIL threatens the quality of life of 
the Wajãpi, through forest degradation, environmental contamination, and the insertion of the 
community in a context of great social vulnerability, which coincides with the increased 
incidence of pests in crops and endemic diseases, such as malaria and leishmaniasis.  

Our dataset is comprised of sand fly records that resulted from the activities of a 
project aimed to evaluate the main risk factors for the disease, using an interdisciplinary 
approach. In 2012, there was an outbreak of leishmaniasis in the WIL affecting more than 20 
people in 7 different villages [17]. This outbreak triggered a broader investigation that was 
conducted between 2012-2015 in order to understand the causal processes related to the local 
epidemiological context, to propose measures to prevent and control the disease among the 
Wajãpi. The investigation unfolded in a multi-institutional project with the partnership of 
institutions related to health services, such as: Distrito Sanitário Especial Indígena (DSEI) 
Amapá e Norte do Pará, Secretaria Municipal de Saúde de Pedra Branca do Amapari, 
Coordenadoria de Vigilância em Saúde do Amapá, Laboratório Central de Saúde Pública do 
Amapá, Instituto René Rachou (Fiocruz-MG), Universidade Federal do Amapá, Universidade de 
São Paulo, and Universidade Federal do Oeste do Pará. Teams with different expertise were 
formed: entomologists, biologists, veterinarians, laboratory technicians, anthropologists, 
epidemiologists, nurses, etc. 

From the beginning, researchers were faced with a complex environmental and 
intercultural context, in which the simple intensification of standard measures recommended 
by health services proved to be insufficient or even antagonistic in relation to the health 
principles and concepts of the indigenous group. Difficult access to villages made it difficult to 
map and record possible transmission sites. The long incubation period of the ACL, the 
complex mobility profile through their territory of the Wajãpi and the limitations of the health 
services, i.e. lack of trained personnel, lack of proper funding and infrastructure, made the 
search for transmission foci, according to the surveillance standards recommended by the 
Ministry of Health – based on the search for individual risk factors, an unpromising task. 

The need for a broader and more sensitive assessment from the ecological, cultural 
and ethnic point of view of this epidemiological context unfolded in a review not only of the 
objectives and methods of providing services in indigenous health and of epidemiological 
research and conduct, but also of an epistemological reconstruction of the process of 
understanding causality in health-disease and its inseparable relationship with social and 
ecological processes, their different scales and dimensions of perception. Therefore, data on 
ACL vectors’ occurrence was paramount. 

A total of 3,218 specimens were identified to either genus or species-level. The most 
abundant genera were Trichophoromyia (20%), Nyssomyia (13%) and Psathyromyia (11%). And 
the most abundant species were T. brachipyga (14%), followed by Pa. dreisbachi (9%) and 
Nyssomyia pajoti (6%). 

Specimens were georeferenced with the aid of a Garmin® 62sGPS. 

The municipality of Tapauá is located on the banks of the Purus River and has a 
population of 16,876 inhabitants and a total area of 84,946 km2 [11]. The main economic 
activity is agriculture (cassava, jute and beans) and extractivism (nuts, rubber, wood, copaiba 
oil and andiroba), livestock has become the main product in the last 10 years. 

The Middle Purus region is located in the southern region of the Amazon rainforest 
and includes several conservation units, in addition to various indigenous lands, several of 
which are already officially recognized by the federal government while others are currently in 
the process of formal legal demarcation. 

According to the SIASI (Sistema de Informação da Atenção à Saúde Indígena), operated 
by the Secretaria Especial de Saúde Indígena (SESAI), the indigenous population of the Middle 
Purus is estimated at around 8,117 inhabitants, divided into 13 ethnic groups and distributed 
in 24 demarcated indigenous lands and another 6 non-demarcated (unidentified and/or 
delimited), the total territorial extension of the demarcated indigenous areas corresponds to 
189,870.964 ha. 

The Suruwaha Indigenous Land (SIL) is located in the municipality of Tapauá. The SIL 
area comprises a total of 239,070 hectares and is located between the Riozinho River and the 
Coxodoá stream, both tributaries of the Cuniuá River, which in turn is a tributary of the Tapauá 
River that flows into the Purus River [18]. The SIL is surrounded to the west by the Deni 
Indigenous Land and to the east by the Hi-Merimã Indigenous Land, of isolated indigenous 
peoples. The population consists of 171 people who were living in isolation and were 
contacted in the 1980s by missionaries [14]. The productive activities of the Suruwaha include 
agriculture, hunting, fishing, gathering and tool making [19]. Hunting is the most prestigious 
activity, and a good hunter not only kills many animals but must also have killed many tapirs, 
the most coveted game because of its size that can feed many people [19]. 

The Wajãpi Indigenous Land (WIL) extends between the basins of the Jari (to the west), 
Amapari (to the east) and Oiapoque (to the north) rivers. Official recognition by the Brazilian 
government occurred in 1996, with a territorial extension of 6,070 km2. The area is of dense 
tropical forest and in rugged relief, integrating the Tumucumaque Mountains complex. 
Currently, the Wajãpi number about 1,221 people, distributed in more than 80 villages [15]. 

The Wajãpi organize themselves into autonomous local groups, called "iwanã-ko", 
which are represented by a local group that has its origin in a specific region, where there are 
several villages. But not all the people of an “iwanã-ko” live in the same region, because when 
marriages between people from different groups take place, one of the spouses starts living in 
the other's region [20], which may represent only a temporary physical settlement. The 
different groups occupy three spatial categories: the places of concentration – rural villages / 
dwellings; intermittent dispersal/settlements (mainly during the dry season – hunting, fishing 
and gathering camps) and "koo kwerã" sites which are wildlife reserves and are left 
undisturbed for wild animals to use and therefore, be hunted. This combination of social, 
political and ecological factors that determine the movements of concentration and dispersion 
of the Wajãpi in its territory seems to accompany the patterns of disease distribution in the 
TIW, so that the tendency to concentrate families close to the Perimetral Norte highway, 
which reaches TIW, seems to be related to the increased incidence of infectious diseases 
[16,21]. 

Sand flies were collected with unbaited CDC-like light traps operated between 5:00 pm 
and 6:00 am. The traps were placed in areas used by the indigenous people, such as swiddens, 
forest areas, hunting grounds, access trails and homes. 

The insects were stored in microtubes containing 70% alcohol and sorted from the 
other insects collected either in the field or under a dissecting microscope in the laboratory. 
The insects were clarified and mounted on a slide to identify the species, using the 
identification key of Galati (2003) [2]. A subsample of the insects will be deposited in the 
Coleção de Flebotomíneos of the Instituto René Rachou/FIOCRUZ-Minas (COLFLEB/FIOCRUZ). 

The collection licenses and permits for our studies were as follows: in the SIL, SISBIO 
collecting license, issue by the Sistema de Autorização e Informação em Biodiversidade 
(IBAMA)  (39337-1) and FUNAI (08620.040969/2013-51); and in the WIL, SISBIO collecting 
license (37935-4), FUNAI (08620.030843/2014-59), Ethics Committee approval (CONEP - CAAE: 
20188213.9.0000.5091), and IPHAN access to associated traditional knowledge for scientific 
research purposes (01450.008806/2014-14). 

Insects were identified by keys available in the literature [2,3] by experienced 
taxonomists. The dataset is in Darwin Core format 41 terms are available for the Suruwaha 
dataset and 39 for the Wajãpí dataset. All mandatory fields are present and have gone through 
screening in the FIOCRUZ IPT, metadata fields are also available on the online pages. 

The data are of importance because they describe the distribution of sand flies collected 
at different sites in two indigenous lands located in the Brazilian Amazon. The data can be used 
by different sectors of academia, government, civil society, NGOs. However, the data can be of 
particular importance to balance scientific knowledge and indigenous knowledge so that health 
surveillance activities are improved and adapted to different eco-social contexts with the 
participation of indigenous people, who better know their territories. 

These data can be used to address challenges in leishmaniases control and to a better 
understanding of the epidemiology of this disease. Since control measures in Brazil are based 
on disease surveillance and monitoring in territorial units, which include biological and 
environmental characteristics, our dataset can contribute to a broader knowledge. Our data 
provide occurrence records from previously unknown which would not normally be surveyed by 
the public health system ACL control programmes from the Brazilian government. These data 
can be used for modelling of both vector and disease distribution in space and time as well as 
provide clues on priority areas for ACL surveillance and control in these areas. 

Our data are an expert-validated and list of sand fly species in which names are up to 
date and can be a valuable source of high-quality data on sand flies from remote areas in the 
Brazilian Amazon.  
