Amazonian phlebotomine fauna is considered one of the most diverse in the world. In addition, the region is the most prevalent for leishmaniasis in Brazil and South America. The state of Acre, which belongs to this region, also stands out in terms of the diversity of the sand fly fauna, as well as the occurrence of American tegumentary leishmaniasis. In this context, the present Dataset comprise a bibliographic review of sand fly species recorded in Acre State, Amazon region, Brazil. A total of 1,096 observations from Material Citation type (and two of preserved specimens) were presented using 32 variables according to Darwin Core terms. The bibliographic review was performed in PubMed, Google Scholar, SciELO, BVS (Biblioteca Virtual em Saúde) and bibliographic references cited in related scientific articles. Thus, the present study is a solid report for further studies on sand fly studies in Acre and other Amazon states.
A total of 22 articles/books, ranging from years 1964 until 2022, were used to obtain the data. As a result, 1,096 (two from preserved specimens) observations were recorded for the state of Acre, records were obtained from eight municipalities, namely: Acrelândia, Assis Brasil, Brasiléia, Bujari, Cruzeiro do Sul, Feijó, Rio Branco and Xapuri. In these, 116 species of 15 genera of sand flies were identified. Therefore, according to all studies carried out on phlebotomine fauna, the state of Acre has 116 species reported.
The genera with most species were: Evandromyia (18), Psychodopygus (18), Psathyromyia (17), Lutzomyia (10), Nyssomyia (9), Trichophoromyia (9), Micropygomyia (9), Pintomyia (6), Pressatia (4), Sciopemyia (4), Bichromomyia (3), Brumptomyia (3), Trichopygomyia (2), Viannamyia (2), Migonemyia (1). Noteworthy, is that 12 observations were reported as Trichophoromyia sp. as the record shows the number of specimens and distribution together for two species Trichophoromyia auraensis and Trichophoromyia ruifreitasi as their females cannot be distinguished by morphology.
As for the diversity, the municipality with most species recorded were: Assis Brasil (78), Rio Branco (68), Xapuri (58), Bujari/Xapuri/Rio Branco (50), Cruzeiro do Sul (30), Brasiléia (20), Feijó (14), Acrelândia (12) (Table 2).
Is important to notice that the number of species for Rio Branco and Xapuri can be different that showed here (Table 2) as one of the articles clustered the results for both municipalities. So we had to group all species records (for this specific article) under the same name (Bujari/Rio Branco/Xapuri) (Table 2). Another issue is regarding Psychodopygus corossoniensis, as it is the only one for the state and the author does not provide the municipality where specimens were collected (the only location reference is “AC Highway Km 22”). Therefore, the county for this observation is NA.
We included a chronological table showing all the scientific data used to compile the dataset by municipality, author and species names (Table 3).
Phlebotominae sand flies (Diptera, Psychodidae) are insects of great medical interest since they can transmit diseases like leishmaniases, bartonellosis and some arboviruses [1]. In the Americas, 547 sand fly species have been recorded and, the majority in tropical areas, where Amazon region shows the greatest diversity and richness for this insects [2, 3]. Located in this region, the state of Acre state exhibits a great richness of phlebotomine species, with recent reports of new records and descriptions of new species [2, 3, 4, 5, 6].
The first published study were carried out by Martins and Silva (1964) [7] on the sand fly fauna in the capital Rio Branco recording 30 species, with Pintomyia nevesi (Damasceno & Arouck, 1956) being the dominant species. In the early 1980s, Arias and Freitas [8] carried out researches in the municipalities of Cruzeiro do Sul, Feijó and Rio Branco, found 50 species, with Trichophoromyia auraensis (Mangabeira, 1942) the most frequent. In the late 2000's, Azevedo et al. [9], in the municipalities of Rio Branco, Bujari and Xapuri found a predominance of Nyssomyia whitmani (Antunes & Coutinho, 1939), Ny. antunesi (Coutinho, 1939) and Th. auraensis. At the same time, Silva-Nunes et al. [10] in rural areas of the municipality of Acrelândia found a predominance of Ny. whitmani and Ny. antunesi. Similar observations have also been made in peri-urban and forest areas of Rio Branco [6, 11]. In Assis Brasil, 67 species were collected, with three new records for Acre, Evandromyia georgii (Freitas & Barret 2002), Lutzomyia evangelistai Martins & Fraiha 1971 and Psychodopygus complexus (Mangabeira, 1941), with the most abundant species being Trichophoromyia spp. (Th. auraensis / Th. ruifreitasi) and Ps. davisi (Root, 1934) both found with Leishamnia braziliensis Vianna 1911 and L. guyanensis Floch, 1954 by molecular techniques [12]. In this same locality, two species were described Lutzomyia naiffi Teles et al. 2013 and Th. ruifreitasi Oliveira et al. 2015, being the female of this indistinguishable from several others of the genus Trichophoromyia. In addition, Assis Brazil has recently unveiled new records of sand fly species [13, 14, 15].
Recent studies carried out on the Brazilian-Bolivian border (Brasiléia and Xapuri municipalites) highlighted the richness and diversity of sand fly species, being Ny. shawi (Fraiha, Ward & Ready, 1981) e Trichophoromyia sp. the most frequent species and, found infected by Leishmania DNA [3] In addition, these studies verified the occurrence of the great diversity of species vectors, captured in domiciliar environments, as well, in forest areas. Also noteworthy in this locality, the description of a new species and revalidation of some taxon [16, 17, 18].
The Acre state is considered a hotspot of American tegumentary leishmaniasis in Amazon, affecting individuals regardless of gender or age group, nevertheless a growing increase in notifications in women and children, which suggests different transmission cycles occurring in the region [19, 20]. Regarding the parasites of the genus Leishmania circulating in human cases in the region, all species of the subgenus Viannia with the exception of L. lindenbergi Silveira, Ishikawa & de Souza, 2002 to date and L. amazonensis (of the subgenus Leishmania) were described [12, 20, 21].
The state of Acre state is situated in the north and is part of the Amazon region of Brazil, corresponding a 1.92% of the Brazilian territory. The population is about 900 thousands inhabitants. The economy is based mainly in extraction of forest materials, particularly rubber and Brazilian chestnut for exportation. Its vegetation is tropical forest and it has humid and hot equatorial climate. The average annual temperature is 31.5 °C and rainfall is 2100 mm [22].
Geographycally the state is divided in two meso-regions named Juruá and Acre Valley, which are subdivided into five micro-regions, such as Rio Branco, Sena Madureira and Brasiléia belonging to Acre Valley and, Cruzeiro do Sul and Tarauacá to Juruá Valley [22].
Two preserved sand fly specimens record were included in the Dataset, these insects were captured using CDC/Shannon traps. After capture, the insects were screened, being separated, and properly identified with the capture location. The insects were clarified using the procedure proposed by Forattini (1973) [23]. After the clarification process, the specimens were mounted between slide and cover slip in Enece medium (Cerqueira, 1943) [24] and identified according to Galati [2].
To review bibliographic material, the following online databases were used: PubMed, Google Scholar, SciELO, BVS - Biblioteca Virtual em Saúde, using the following terms: "Acre" AND ("sand fly" OR "sandfly" OR "sandflies" OR “sand flies” OR “Phlebotominae”) and, therefore, the first word was mandatory and the others had to appear in one of the ways described. Bibliographic references cited in scientific articles were also used as data sources.
All scientific articles/books were assessed in order to obtain data from 32 standardized variables of Darwin Core Terms (Darwin Core, 2022) (Table 1). These variables were subset in four types to identify the Dataset, to describe the essential information about specimens condition and quantity, capture location and methods, and taxonomic status for each observation (Table 1).
Data were collected and checked with the aid of other bibliographical references (Galati EAB. Phlebotominae (Diptera, Psychodidae): Classification, Morphology and Terminology of Adults and Identification of American Taxa. In: Rangel EF, Shaw JJ, editors. Brazilian Sand Flies : Biology, Taxonomy, Medical Importance and Control [Internet]. Cham: Springer International Publishing; 2018).
And names were checked by experienced taxonomists.
We have assembled the most exhaustive scientific data from sand flies in Acre, Brazil that have been published until now. This Dataset will provide an important source of knowledge on the distribution, identification, and taxonomic status of the sand fly species already recorded in the state. Therefore, it will allow future studies to have a sound material as a background for sand fly ecology, epidemiology and taxonomy studies in the area.
The dataset used in this manuscript was deposited at https://ipt.sibbr.gov.br/sibbr/resource?r=literature_review_sandflies_acre at the SiBBr IPT(Integrated Publishing Toolkit) referenced as: Espíndola Godoy R, Fernandes Brilhante A, José de Andrade A, Helena Fernandes Shimabukuro P (2022): literature_review_sandflies_acre. v1.0. No organisation. Dataset/Occurrence.
We would like to thank Clara Baringo Fonseca for her help in the preparation of the Darwin Core spreadsheet.