Self-Controlled Case Series (SCCS) and Self-Controlled Risk Interval (SCRI) study 
designs are types of studies where cases act as their controls. They are commonly used  
by pharmacovigilance to study rare events. There is no existing tool for the assessment of 
the methodological quality of such studies. Critical appraisal in primary and secondary 
studies is crucial as it enables the reader to evaluate how the study was elaborated and 
take this into consideration while analyzing the evidence presented. This paper presents 
a proposal of an instrument that has been adapted from an already existing tool used for 
cohort studies and it combines the elements of this tool and the premises of the SCCS and 
SCRI study designs. It is expected that the tool will help researchers and readers in 
critically appraising SCCS and SCRI study designs.  

A Self-controlled Case Series (SCCS) or case series method is an observational 
epidemiological study design used to study the temporal association between a time 
varying exposure and a sudden onset of events. It’s a study design where the observed 
cases act as their own controls (1–5).  

It was originally developed in 1995 for the evaluation of vaccine safety in 
pharmacoepidemiology and nowadays it is used in general epidemiology (1,6,7). It is 
derivative of a cohort study design where individuals who have experienced the event of 
interest are observed over time, within a pre-established observation period, where the 
exposure history and the occurrence of the event of interest are identified. During the 
observation period, the risk period and the control period are established, which usually 
do not have the same length of time. The risk period is defined a priori and is considered 
as the time during or after exposure where the individuals are at a higher or reduced risk 
of the events of interest after an exposure. The control period constitutes any time within 
the observation period (before, after or between) the risk period (1,2,8). For example, in 
a study to evaluate the risk of GBS after Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) Vaccination in 
England, the risk period started with vaccination (day 0) and ended on day 91 and a 
control period  considered any time outside the risk period (9).  

Normally, information from past events may help define the risk period (1). For 
example, in the case of influenza vaccines and the development of Guillain-Barré 
syndrome (GBS), the prespecified risk period is 42 days after vaccination. This risk period 
was stipulated after a cluster of GBS cases occurred in the United States in 1976 after the 
population was vaccinated with A/New Jersey influenza vaccine (10). During this risk 
period, it is presumed that there will be increased risk of the vaccinated individuals to 
develop the GBS and the time after as the control period (1,11).  

A SCCS design is suitable for independent recurrent events as well as rare non-
recurrent events. Some of the assumptions that make SCCS applicable include: the 
observed events are rare; the occurrence of an event must not alter the probability of 
subsequent exposure that is, if the events are consecutive, they should be independent; 
the occurrence of the event of interest must not censor or affect the observation period 
and that the observation period for each individual is independent of the event times. The 
latter can be violated in the event of death (1,2,4,5,7).  

The SCCS estimates the relative incidence (RI) of events of interest in a defined 
time period after a transient exposure and the control period. The RI is the ratio of events 
of exposure in the risk period and the control period (1,6,11).   

The main advantage of SCCS is that time invariant confounders that act on the 
standard rates are rigorously controlled. These factors are like: sex, location, genetics, 
socio economic factors and underlying health condition  (1,5,12). It is also cheaper and 
easier to collect data since the design only requires cases with the event of interest.  Also, 
as an advantage is the methodological efficiency compared to the cohort design, for 
example, in the surveillance of adverse events after vaccination, a traditional cohort study 
may not be applicable for full coverage of the effects since it would be a challenge to 
recruit unvaccinated controls as the surveillance systems normally collect data on 
individuals who reported an adverse event. The SCCS requires a small sample of the 
population to be studied thus it can produce results that are clinically and statistically 
valid from just a few cases  (1,4). Some of the limitations of the SCCS design include: it 
does not produce estimates of absolute incidence but only estimates of relative incidence; 
as one of its assumptions, it requires that the probability of exposure is not affected by 
the occurrence of an outcome event, the effect of exposure has to be transient, variations 
over time are not adjusted for, it is prone to selection and information bias (normally uses 
information from surveillance databases). For non-recurrent events, the SCCS design 
works only when the event risk is small over the observation period (1,12) 

The Self-controlled risk interval (SCRI) is a variant of a SCCS design where cases 
also act as their own controls. There is a risk period and a control interval. The control 
period is either before or after the exposure. The SCRI design has a reduced control 
interval, for example, in the case of vaccines, after the risk period is determined, a selected 
short period is selected before or after vaccination and close to the risk period. The 
reduced control interval is chosen to avoid time-confounding issues like age and 
seasonality. The control interval is usually similar to the risk period (13,14). For example, 
in a study to evaluate the adverse events following varicella vaccine in Taiwan, the risk 
interval was day 1 to day 42 after vaccination and the control interval was the period 
between day 43 to day 84 post vaccination (15).  

The striking difference between the two study designs is the observation period. 
In the SCRI design, the index date is the vaccination date, and it is used to define the risk 
and control period. On the other hand, the SCCS design choses an observation period 
independent of the vaccination date and all cases are identified in the observation period 
(14).  

Just like the SCCS, the SCRI design controls for fixed confounding factors like 
sex, race, genetic factors, preexisting health conditions and geographical locations. For 
time varying confounders like seasonality and age, there is a need for explicit adjustments, 
like in the case of vaccines, the adverse effects vary especially among children and can 
also vary over the follow up period and be confounded with other factors giving a false 
positive impression of the vaccine effects (13,14). Unlike SCCS that includes both the 
vaccinated and unvaccinated individuals in the case of the analysis of adverse effects after 
vaccination, the SCRI design only includes vaccinated cases. (13). This is the primary 
strength of the SCRI design as it reduces bias that can arise among the vaccinated and 
unvaccinated cases (16).  

SCCS and SCRI study designs are crucial in epidemiology where other study 
designs may not be quite suitable like the case of adverse events after vaccination in 
pharmacovigilance and thus, they require their quality evaluated and reported considering 
the basic assumptions of such study designs.  

In evidence synthesis, the critical appraisal of the studies included is essential so 
as to access the credibility of the findings which is a consequence of the methodological 
rigor applied. It also helps to analyze the transparency and reproducibility of the published 
evidence. The absence of the critical appraisal is a barrier to the consumers of the 
evidence generated since there is hinderance in the ability to interpret the research 
findings which consider the strengths and weaknesses of the study in question (17,18).  

To the best of our knowledge and after contacting two renowned researchers in 
SCCS/SCRI design, it came to our knowledge that no specific methodological assessment 
tool that has been reported and validated for use in evaluating the methodology of 
SCCS/SCRI designs. In 2018, Wachira and collaborators adapted the New Castle Ottawa 
Scale for quality assessment of cohort studies to evaluate SCCS study designs in their 
systematic review of the etiology of Guillain-Barré (19,20).  The present study aims at 
proposing a methodological quality assessment tool that can be used in quality assessment 
of SCCS/SCRI study designs.  

The quality assessment tool is an adaptation of the Newcastle Ottawa Scale (19) 
for the quality assessment of cohort studies as presented by Wachira and colleagues and 
considers the basic assumptions of SCCS/SCRI (21). The proposal was adapted by V.W 
and  assessed by H.M and M.R. Two other scholars used the tool in their systematic 
reviews studies (22,23).   

There are two approaches that are widely used in the  quality assessment of a 
primary study: the component approach that evaluates the individual items of each 
domain of the assessment tool and the composite approach that considers the quality 
scores of each of the domains and gives an overall score (24).  

The proposed quality assessment tool is divided into three sections: Selection, 
Comparability and Outcomes as shown in Table 1. In the Selection section, the tool 
evaluates the representativeness of the selected cases in the SCCS/SCRI in relation to the 
total cases coming from the study population, the definition of the cases, the 
ascertainment of exposure and the absence of the outcome of interest at the start of the 
observation period. In the comparability section, confounding factors that vary over time 
are evaluated such as age and seasonality. The study should report if these factors were 
considered and if any adjustments were made in the analysis of the results. In the outcome 
section, there is evaluation of the ascertainment of the outcome of interest, clear indication 
of the risk and control periods and adequacy of the observation periods. 

For the overall/composite assessment in each section, stars are allocated. For 
section 1, a maximum of three stars can be awarded to a study if the cases are 
representatives of the cases in the general population like in the case of vaccine safety 
studies, if there is a clear ascertainment of the exposure of interest and if there is a 
demonstration that the outcome of interest occurred in the observation period. In section 
2, a maximum of two stars can be awarded to a study if it reports that time varying 
confounders were accounted for or if the follow up period was short enough to mitigate 
time-confounding factors. In section 3, a study can be awarded a maximum of five stars 
if there is a clear way of confirming the outcome, if the risk and control periods are well 
stated,  if the time in the risk and control periods was long enough for the outcome of 
interest to be analyzed and if there was complete follow up of the cases or accountability 
of the cases lost during follow up. In total, a study can be awarded a maximum of 10 stars. 

In this first proposal of the assessment tool, the overall assessment of a study can 
be considered to be of “poor quality” if the study is awarded 3 stars, “moderate quality”, 
if the study is awarded up to 6 stars and “high quality” if the study gets 7 to 10 stars. This 
is just a suggestion of how to grade the overall quality of the study evaluated but the users 
of the tool are at liberty to decide how this can be applied in the studies analyzed 
depending on the specificities of the research question tackled in those studies.  

There were no weights accorded to the sections in the tool thus giving the user the 
opportunity to be flexible in determining the overall quality of the study taking into 
consideration the need of the quality assessment and the nature of the evidence synthesis 
product in question. Table 1: Shows the sections of the quality assessment tool, an 
explanation of the items considered and how to award stars to these items.  

There are different quality evaluation tools for both quantitative and qualitative 
studies. At times, researchers modify existing tools or develop their own to meet their 
needs and this was our case. In 2018, we had to evaluate SCCS and SCRI included in a 
systematic review, and we couldn’t find an existing tool that could be used. This led us 
to adapting the NOS for cohort studies.  

This is the first version of the proposed quality assessment tool for SCCS and 
SCRI. It has been used in five studies:  one master’s degree dissertation, one published 
article, two projects of a scientific initiation program (not published), one thesis  and one 
article submitted for publication (20–23). It is based on the NOC that has never been 
published in a journal, thus has not undergone peer review. On the other hand, it is worth 
noting that the instrument was elaborated via Delphi method, has been tested in many 
systematic reviews and has been modified over this process (25) . Besides the critics the 
NOS receives, it has been used to evaluate innumerous studies included in published 
systematic reviews, thus confirming it’s validity and applicability.  

In this first version of the tool, quality scores are recommended but no weighting 
scores have been attributed to the individual items in the domains evaluated. This allows 
flexibility of the evaluation process depending on the type of evidence synthesis being 
elaborated. Quality scores have previously been criticized as being poor predictors of the 
overall quality of a study especially when they are considered as a factor for the 
performance of a meta-analysis (26,27).  

The SCCS and SCRI study designs are used in pharmacovigilance and are useful 
in analyzing rare events. They have been commonly used in studying populations after 
vaccine exposure like in the case of influenza vaccines and Human Papillomavirus 
vaccines (28,29) . Since 2020, the world has been facing the Covid-19 pandemic and in 
2021, Covid-19 vaccines started being administered in all parts of the world. There has 
been temporal association of the Covid-19 vaccines or SARS-CoV-2 infection with the 
development of events like GBS, cardiovascular events like stroke, encephalitis, 
psychiatric events among others (30–32). A huge number of both primary and secondary 
studies have been produced to report these events. The SCCS and SCRI could also be 
used in such cases and the use of the proposed quality assessment tool would be useful in 
ascertaining that the methodological rigor was adhered to, thus making the findings more 
reliable.  

This proposed quality assessment tool has been used in a few studies, some of 
which have been published or are undergoing peer review. It is worth highlighting that 
this is just an adaptation based on necessities that arose to evaluate self-controlled study 
designs. In the course of time, it will be subjected to a Delphi process to validate its use 
and enhance its applicability. It is our expectation that the tool will contribute to critical 
assessment of the methodological quality of SCCS and SCRI studies and that it will be 
continuously improved and adapted by the scientific community.  

The SCCS and SCRI are important study designs in pharmacoepidemiology and 
are useful in studying rare events reported after transient exposures, a good example are 
the influenza vaccines and the development of GBS. This paper presents a first proposal 
of a quality assessment tool for such studies. This came after the authors necessity to 
evaluate the methodological quality of such designs a few years back and no instrument 
was found, thus, the authors adapted an already existing tool and took into consideration 
the premises of SCCS/SCRI to design the tool. It is expected that the tool may guide 
researchers in assessing the methodological rigor of SCCS/SCRI study designs especially 
now with the Covid-19 pandemic where these designs could be widely used especially in 
studying the events being reported after the administration of the Covid-19 vaccines.  

This study was supported by Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nivel 
Superior (CAPES), Fundação de Apoio à Pesquisa do DF (FAP-DF) (Edital 04/2016 – 
Demanda Induzida – Aedes Aegypti e as arboviroses Zika, Chikungunya e Dengue) and 
the National Institute for Science and Technology for Health Technology Assessment 
(IATS).  
