  1/3
Revista da Sociedade Brasileira de Medicina Tropical
Journal of the Brazilian Society of Tropical Medicine
Vol.:53:e202000270: 2020
doi: 10.1590/0037-8682-00270-2020
Corresponding author: Prof. Graciela Arbilla. 
e-mail: gracielaiq@gmail.com
 0000-0001-7732-8336
Received 9 May 2020
Accepted 19 May 2020
Letter
COVID-19: challenges for a new epoch
Cleyton Martins da Silva[1],[2] and Graciela Arbilla[1]
[1]. Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Instituto de Química, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brasil. 
[2]. Universidade Veiga de Almeida, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brasil.
Dear Editor:
The term “pan-epidemic Anthropocene” was proposed 
by Lucey et al. to refer to multifocal large infectious disease 
epidemics related to anthropogenic forces that have impacted and 
transformed the Earth System1. Smallpox was restricted to the Old 
World for thousands of years but became the first “pan-epidemic 
Anthropocene” when Europeans brought it to the Americas in the 
16th century. 
The arrival of Europeans in America was considered as the first 
globalization event where the two civilizations met on unequal terms 
after 12,000 years of separation. Smallpox emerged in January 1519 
and spread rapidly to the mainland of Central America. Native 
Americans had no immunity to the infections brought in by the 
Europeans. Smallpox, influenza, measles, typhus, pneumonia, 
scarlet fever, malaria, and yellow fever emerged subsequently 
and affected millions. Approximately 90% of the estimated 50–80 
million Native American population died of these diseases, which 
suggests approximately 10% of mankind died during 1493–1650. 
This event initiated the globalization and homogenization of the 
world’s species and diseases2.
In the 20th century, epidemics and pandemics continued to 
kill millions of people. The first pandemic of the 21st century 
was reported as influenza A (H1N1) in 2009-2010 that resulted in 
100,000-400,000 deaths in the first year; however, for the first time, 
a vaccine was developed, produced, and distributed worldwide 
during the first year3. 
Globalization, the exchange of species, materials, energy, and 
culture, as well as urbanization and the increase in the world’s 
population and the global flow of people, had a clear, and probably 
irreversible, impact on the environment and the equilibrium of 
the Earth System that led to the proposal of a new geological 
Epoch, called Anthropocene4. The term “Anthropocene” was 
proposed by Crutzen and Stoermer in 2000, to emphasize the 
central role of mankind in geology and ecology5. The increasing 
impact of human actions on the environment was substantial, 
global, and long-lasting2.  There is an increasing consensus on 
the formal recognition of Anthropocene as a geological Epoch, 
functionally and stratigraphically distinct from the Holocene6. New 
anthropogenic materials such as plastics, concrete, aluminum, and 
synthetic fibers; modification of sedimentary process; wastes from 
nuclear weapons testing; increase in atmospheric methane and 
CO2 concentrations; changes in carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus 
cycles; climate and biotic changes are clear Earth System trends 
that confirm the transformations to be driven by human residents. 
Globalization, urbanization, transportation, increase in economic 
activities, and the flux of people, live species, and manufactured 
products are clear socioeconomic trends that characterize this new 
epoch, commonly referred to as “Human Epoch.” 
All these factors, in addition to political destabilization and 
civil and international wars, led to poverty, increase in maternal 
and child death, and spread of diseases. Hotez7 reported that these 
changes have promoted the emergence of catastrophic neglected 
tropical diseases (NTDs), first being dengue fever in the 1980s in 
the American continent, chikungunya and Zika virus infections in  
Latin-American and Caribbean regions, and malaria in the 
Amazonian region of South America. NTDs along with other 
infections such as leishmaniasis, schistosomiasis, and Middle East 
Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) coronavirus infection, measles, 
and polio spread in the Middle East and North Africa. During 
2014–2015, the Western African Ebola virus epidemic decimated 
numerous families and caused a socioeconomic disruption in 
Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone.
The outbreak of COVID-19 provides strong evidence that 
urbanization and globalization have changed the way people live 
in communities, and advances in transport and communications 
2/3
Silva CM and Arbilla G - COVID-19: challenges for a new epoch
have led to a rapid spread of diseases, through both domestic and 
international transportation modes such as buses, trains, boats, 
and flights. Increased density of people in residences, public 
transportation, work environments, shopping centers, and cultural, 
political, sport, and religious events have increased the possibilities 
of virus transmission in the metros. Social inequalities lead to 
higher risks, particularly in middle- and low-income countries that 
generally have weaker health systems and a limited capacity to 
handle a rapid surge in cases. Poverty contributes to disseminating 
epidemics and pandemics, while simultaneously helping to 
perpetuate poverty through their longstanding negative effects.
As no specific drugs or vaccines are available, the mitigation 
of the exponential spread of COVID-19 relies on community 
mitigation strategies8. There is a crescent consensus that social 
isolation to prevent the virus spread is the correct strategy from not 
only the human rights point of view but also the economic point 
of view. It seems clear that the collapse of the health care systems 
and millions of deaths would decimate countries financially, and 
as a society, thus saving human lives must be the governments’ 
first priority. 
Although the pandemic is a global phenomenon and the 
consequence of urbanization, transport, and interchange of people, 
live species, and manufactured products, its impact is greatly 
shaped by decisions taken by the individual governments. Many 
governments responded swiftly while others, after an initial slow 
response, acknowledged their error and adopted the World Health 
Organization’s (WHO) recommendations. Unfortunately for all, 
some are still ignoring WHO’s recommendations on avoiding mass 
gatherings. Recently, Croda et al.9 reported on the progression 
of COVID-19 cases in Brazil and previous experiences with 
other health emergencies that constituted an important legacy 
in dealing with epidemics and demonstrated Brazil’s scientific 
capacity. They also discussed the initially implemented measures 
to reduce the virus spread and mortality. Despite the exceptional 
efforts by the state governors and city mayors, the response of the 
country’s President contributes to the growing uncertainty among 
the population about the health risks and economic impacts of 
the pandemic10. In uncertain times, positive leadership navigates 
through a crisis; leaders are required to make the right decisions 
based on science and to craft a good narrative to clarify the problems 
and unite the population to manage the situation. Global problems 
require global solutions and everybody’s efforts. 
In addition to all the negative impacts, the pandemic has opened 
new opportunities, displayed examples of solidarity in the local 
communities, and allowed sharing of resources, information, and 
expertise from countries further ahead in the pandemic or with 
better results and knowledge in controlling the spread. The scientific 
communities worldwide have joined hands and many universities 
have organized groups of researchers and students to help in the 
pandemic relief efforts in every possible manner. 
The pandemic is a strong reminder that to be prepared for the 
future, a fundamental change in our mindset, commitments, and 
values is necessary. It is necessary to create a change in our current 
way of living and a concentrated effort to establish conditions 
for humanity to manage itself in the Anthropocene, the “Age of 
Humans.” British economist Kate Raworth, from Oxford University, 
has rightly mentioned that humanity’s 21st-century challenge is to 
meet the needs of all within the means of the Planet11. Her model, 
known as “Doughnut Economics”, has recently been adopted to 
guide Amsterdam out of the economic impact left by the coronavirus 
pandemic12. Environmental repair, renewable energy, more 
investments in science, public health, and education are needed 
to reduce inequalities, climate changes, and the human impact on 
Earth’s equilibrium, else, humanity will never be prepared enough 
to confront the devastating challenges of a pandemic. Humans have 
the opportunity of saving their own lives and the life of all species 
in the Earth System through advanced technology and science.
Preparedness is crucial to reduce the health, economic, and social 
impacts of a future epidemic, it is also the only way to avoid the 
spread of other diseases. Pandemics are not aleatory events but are the 
consequence of human interactions with the environment and could be 
avoided or reduced through science and investments in health, education 
and transportation and improved through better conditions of living.   
This is an opportunity for the global community to take 
advantage of the spirit of cooperation, embrace diversity and arrive 
at a necessary common global agreement to manage the future of 
Earth collectively.
FINANCIAL SUPPORT
GA and CMS received partial financial support from the Brazilian 
National Council for Scientific and Technological Development 
(CNPq) and the National Foundation for the Development of Private 
Higher Education (FUNADESP), respectively. 
AUTHORS’ CONTRIBUTION
All authors contributed towards the conceptualization, drafting, 
critical review, and finalization of the manuscript.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no potential conflicts of interest with respect 
to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this manuscript.
REFERENCES 
1.	 Lucey DR, Sholts S, Donaldson H, White J, Mitchell SR.  On health 
education for future physicians in the pan-epidemic “Age of Humans”. 
Int J Infect Dis. 2017;64:1-3.
2.	 Lewis SL, Maslin MA.  The human planet. How we created the 
Anthropocene. 1st ed. New Haven and London: Yale University Press; 
2018.
3.	 WHO. World Health Organization, Past Pandemics, 2020 [cited 
2020 April 30]. Available from: http://www.euro.who.int/en/health-
topics/communicable-diseases/influenza/pandemic-influenza/past-
pandemics. 
4.	 Silva CM, Arbilla G. Anthropocene: the challenges of a new world. 
Revista Virtual de Química. 2018;10(6):1619-47. 
5.	 Crutzen P, Stoermer EF. The “Anthropocene”. IGBP Newsletter 2000; 
41:17-18.
6.	 Waters CN, Zalasiewicz J, Summerhayes C, Barnosky AD, Poirier C, 
et al. The Anthropocene Is Functionally and Stratigraphically Distinct 
From the Holocene. Science. 2016;351(6269):137-47.
  3/3
Rev Soc Bras Med Trop | on line | Vol.:53:e202000270, 2020
7.	 Hotez PJ.  Neglected tropical diseases in the Anthropocene: The 
cases of zica, ebola, and other infections. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 
2016;10(4):30004648.
8.	 Villela DAM. The value of mitigating epidemic peaks of COVID-19 
for more effective public health responses. Rev Soc Bras Med Trop. 
2020;53 https://doi.org/10.1590/0037-8682-0135-2020. 
9.	 Croda J, Oliveria WK, Frutuoso, RL, Mandetta LH, Baia-da-Silva DC, 
et al. COVID-19 in Brazil: advantages of a socialized unified health 
system and preparation to contain cases. Rev Soc Bras Med Trop. 
2020;53:e20200167 https://doi.org/10.1590/0037-8682-0167-2020.
10.	 Editorial. COVID-19 in Brazil: “So what?”. The   Lancet. 2020, 395:1461. https://
www.thelancet.com/action/showPdf?pii=S0140-6736%2820%2931095-3.
11.	 Raworth K. Doughnut Economics: Seven Ways to Think Like a 21st-
Century Economist. Oxford: Cornerstone; 2017.
12.	 The Guardian. Amsterdam to embrace “doughnut” model to mend post-
coronavirus economy. [cited 2020 May 8]. Available from: https://www.
theguardian.com/world/2020/apr/08/amsterdam-doughnut-model-mend-
post-coronavirus-economy.
OPEN ACCESS
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
