Publication status: Preprint has been published in a journal as an article
DOI of the published article: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1010905
Assembling the perfect bacterial genome using Oxford
Nanopore and Illumina sequencing
Ryan R. Wick, Louise M. Judd, Kathryn E. Holt
https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.5053
Submitted on: 2022-11-11
Posted on: 2022-11-11 (version 1)
(YYYY-MM-DD)
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
Assembling the perfect bacterial genome 
using Oxford Nanopore and Illumina 
sequencing 
Ryan R. Wick1*, Louise M. Judd2 and Kathryn E. Holt1,3 
1.
Department of Infectious Diseases, Central Clinical School, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
2.
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and
Immunity, Melbourne, Australia
3.
Department of Infection Biology, London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom
* rrwick@gmail.com
Abstract 
A perfect bacterial genome assembly is one where the assembled sequence is an exact match for the 
organism’s genome – each replicon sequence is complete and contains no errors of any scale. While 
this has been difficult to achieve in the past, improvements in long-read sequencing, assemblers and 
polishers have brought perfect assemblies within reach. Here we describe our recommended approach 
for assembling a bacterial genome to perfection using a combination of Oxford Nanopore 
Technologies long reads and Illumina short reads: Trycycler long-read assembly, Medaka long-read 
polishing, Polypolish short-read polishing, followed by other short-read polishing tools with manual 
curation. We also discuss potential pitfalls one might encounter when assembling challenging 
genomes, and we provide an online tutorial with sample data (github.com/rrwick/perfect-bacterial-
genome-tutorial). 
Authors' contributions 
RRW (0000-0001-8349-0778): Conceptualization, Investigation, Methodology, Software, 
Visualization, Writing – Original Draft, Writing – Review & Editing 
LMJ (0000-0003-3613-4839): Methodology, Writing – Original Draft, Writing – Review & Editing 
KEH (0000-0003-3949-2471): Funding acquisition, Supervision, Writing – Review & Editing 
Funding 
This work was supported, in whole or in part, by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation (KEH, grant 
number OPP1175797). Under the grant conditions of the Foundation, a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 Generic License has already been assigned to the Author Accepted Manuscript version 
that might arise from this submission. This work was also supported by an Australian Government 
Research Training Program Scholarship (RRW). The funders had no role in study design, data 
collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. 
Conflict of interest 
The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest. 
Data availability 
Sample data and scripts are available at: github.com/rrwick/perfect-bacterial-genome-tutorial 
Keywords 
bacterial genome assembly; Oxford Nanopore; long-read sequencing; hybrid assembly 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.5053
Introduction 
Compared to eukaryotes which have complex genomes often exceeding one billion base pairs (bp) in 
length, prokaryote genomes are small, typically containing a single circular chromosome a few million 
bp in length and often small extrachromosomal plasmids1. In many genomic applications, it would be 
most useful to know the bacterial genome sequence in its entirety, i.e. the full sequence of nucleotides 
for each piece of DNA in the cell. However, DNA sequencers work by fragmenting the genome and 
sequencing the fragments, producing reads: randomly ordered small pieces of the genome2. Reads are 
imperfect, with the frequency and type of errors depending on the platform. They are also redundant, 
because it is necessary to produce reads that total to many times the genome size to ensure that the 
genome is well covered. There is thus a disconnect between what sequencers provide (small, imperfect, 
redundant sequences) and what we want (a complete, error-free genome). 
The solution to this problem is de novo assembly: the computational process of reconstructing a genome 
from sequencing reads. There are two broad goals to consider with genome assembly: accuracy and 
completeness. Accuracy refers to the number of errors present in the assembled sequences (contigs). 
Such errors can be small in scale (e.g. an incorrect base) or larger in scale (e.g. the addition/removal of 
hundreds of bases). Completeness refers to the length of the contigs relative to the corresponding 
genomic sequence, i.e. how fragmented the assembly is. Longer contigs are better, ideally each contig 
representing an entire replicon in the genome. We define a ‘perfect’ assembly as one which maximises 
both accuracy and completeness. A perfect assembly of a bacterial genome would contain one 
complete and error-free contig per replicon and no additional contigs. 
Many downstream analyses do not require high-quality assemblies, e.g. one can identify the species of 
a genome or the presence/absence of a gene using a crude assembly3. There are, however, tasks which 
require extreme accuracy, e.g. estimating mutation rates and inferring transmission chains, where 
even a small number of errors can have consequences. Perfect assemblies offer no limits on their 
downstream uses, making ‘is my assembly good enough?’ an irrelevant question. In the absence of 
assembly errors, many analyses which involve interrogating reads directly (using computationally 
intensive approaches, e.g. variant calling) could be replaced by simpler assembly-based alternatives. 
Here we describe and demonstrate a modern approach for producing a bacterial genome assembly 
with the goal of perfection using a combination of Oxford Nanopore Technologies (ONT) long reads 
and Illumina short reads (Figure 1). These platforms were chosen for their availability and 
widespread adoption in microbial genomics. While older hybrid assembly methods have used a short-
read-first approach (building a short-read assembly graph and then scaffolding with long reads)4, 
improvements in the yield and accuracy of long-read sequencing now mean that long-read-first hybrid 
assembly (making a long-read-only assembly and then polishing with short reads) can produce more 
accurate results5, and that is the approach we use in this manuscript. We also provide an online 
tutorial (github.com/rrwick/perfect-bacterial-genome-tutorial) with sample data (hybrid sequencing of 
Staphylococcus aureus strain JKD61596) so readers can try this method for themselves. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.5053
Figure 1: illustrated overview of our recommended approach to perfect 
bacterial whole genome assembly. 
Step 1: DNA extraction 
DNA should be extracted from a single bacterial colony to minimise the chance of genomic 
heterogeneity (see Pitfalls). While the best method for extracting DNA can vary by organism, one 
should aim to maximise purity and molecular weight. High purity will allow for better ONT yields, as 
chemical and biological impurities can damage or clog nanopores, shortening the life of flow cells7. 
High molecular weight will produce longer ONT reads, so one should avoid vortexing, minimise 
handling/pipetting and minimise freeze-thaw cycles to reduce shearing of DNA molecules8. 
Extraction methods for most bacteria should incorporate cell lysis by enzymatic digestion, using 
lysozyme (Sigma Aldrich, L6876) followed by proteinase K digestion (as provided in DNA extraction 
kits). This method is suitable for most Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria, but optimisation 
with additional enzymes may be required for difficult-to-lyse bacteria. Magnetic bead-based DNA 
extraction is recommended to reduce DNA shearing and maximise throughput. Recommended kits 
(in order of preference) are: GenFind V3 (Beckman Coulter, C34881) and MagAttract HMW DNA 
(Qiagen, 67563). For bacterial isolates that are difficult to lyse enzymatically, bead-beating can be 
used, but ONT read length may be compromised. 
If culturing and DNA extraction is conducted multiple times (e.g. once for ONT sequencing and 
again for Illumina sequencing), there is the risk of genomic differences between the DNA samples9. 
This can lead to difficulties during polishing, so we recommend using a single DNA extract for all 
sequencing runs. It may also be prudent to freeze additional DNA or bacterial pellets in case further 
sequencing is later required. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.5053
Step 2: sequencing 
Long-read ONT sequencing 
One key consideration for ONT sequencing is depth: how deep must the ONT read set be? High read 
depth aids both assembly (allowing for more independent read sets in Trycycler, see Step 3) and 
polishing (yielding higher accuracy, see Step 4). When aiming for a perfect assembly, consider 100× 
depth to be a minimum, with 200× being ideal. Depths above 200× are better but will give 
diminishing returns. Using a single ONT flow cell for one bacterial isolate may provide excessive 
depth, so multiplexing is common in microbial genomics. This is not a problem for assembly, though 
barcode leakage should be considered (see Pitfalls). 
Another consideration is length: how long must the ONT reads be? N50 length is a commonly used 
metric: the length-weighted median10. To ensure a complete assembly, the read set should have an 
N50 length greater than the longest repeat sequence. For many bacterial genomes, this is the rRNA 
operon, which is ~5 kbp and usually present in multiple copies11, making an ONT read N50 of 
~20 kbp a good target. In rare cases where the genome has an unusually long repeat (see Pitfalls), 
ultra-long DNA extraction protocols may be necessary12. 
ONT library preparation, chemistry and basecalling are also important factors. Both ligation-based 
and rapid preparations are appropriate for bacterial whole-genome sequencing, though ligation-based 
preparations can favour sequencing yield while rapid preparations can favour read length13. ONT 
currently offers MinION/GridION flow cells with two different pores: R9.4.1 (released in 2017) and 
R10.4.1 (released in 2022). The pores used in R10.4.1 flow cells are longer, improving homopolymer 
resolution and consensus accuracy, making them the better choice for assembly14. Basecalling, the 
computational process of translating the sequencer’s raw signals into nucleotide sequences, is under 
constant development, so users should opt for the most recent version of ONT’s recommended 
basecaller and use its highest-accuracy model. If users do not have an ONT sequencer with a GPU 
(e.g. a GridION), then access to a computer with a GPU will be required to perform basecalling. 
After basecalling, QC filtering can improve the quality of the ONT reads. We recommend using 
Filtlong15 to remove the worst reads (short length and low accuracy) with --keep_percent 90. If the 
read set has a poor N50 but is very deep, then removing short reads (e.g. <5 kbp) can help with 
assembly, though this may compromise small plasmid recovery (see Pitfalls). 
Short-read Illumina sequencing 
Since Illumina reads will only be used for final polishing (see Step 5), they carry less importance than 
ONT reads. Most current Illumina platforms produce similar data (e.g. 150-bp paired-end reads) and 
will function equally well for bacterial whole-genome sequencing, with instrument choice driven by 
cost and multiplexing needs. Nextera XT library preparations produce variable read depth (i.e. some 
regions of the genome may have low depth), so Illumina DNA Prep (a.k.a. Nextera DNA Flex) and 
TruSeq are preferable16. If Nextera XT is used, aim for a high mean depth (e.g. 300×) to compensate 
for depth variation, otherwise 100× should be sufficient. For highly repetitive genomes, mate-pair 
preparations may improve short-read polishing performance (see Pitfalls). After Illumina reads are 
produced, we recommend using a QC tool such as fastp17 to remove low-quality bases and adapter 
sequences. 
Step 3: long-read assembly 
The goal of long-read assembly is to produce complete sequences with no structural errors, i.e. the 
only errors in the assembly should be small-scale, e.g. single-bp substitutions, insertions or deletions. 
This is because later polishing steps can repair small-scale errors but may not be able to fix larger 
structural errors. 
Several long-read assemblers have been developed that are suitable for bacterial genomes, including 
Canu18, Flye19, NECAT20, NextDenovo21 and Raven22, each of which uses different methods and thus 
has advantages/disadvantages. Regardless of the assembler used, most long-read bacterial genome 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.5053
assemblies contain avoidable errors, and given the same read set, different assemblers are likely to 
produce assemblies with different errors23. Trycycler exploits this fact by building a consensus from 
multiple alternative assemblies of the same genome, allowing it to avoid structural errors, remove 
spurious contigs and ensure that circular sequences have no missing/duplicated bases at their ends5. 
We therefore recommend using Trycycler to produce long-read bacterial genome assemblies. 
However, note that Trycycler is not an automated tool – it requires human judgement and 
interaction. 
Step 4: long-read polishing 
This step aims to fix as many remaining errors as possible using only long reads. We recommend using 
Medaka24, which we have found to produce more accurate results than Nanopolish25,26. Medaka uses 
a neural network and comes with trained models that correspond to specific combinations of ONT 
chemistry and basecaller, so one should choose the Medaka model which most closely matches their 
ONT reads. Alternatively, long-read variant callers such as Clair327 can be used as polishers by 
applying the called variants to the assembly. 
Long-read polishing is done before short-read polishing because it is less influenced by genomic 
repeats. A ‘repeat’ in this context is a sequence which causes reads to align to multiple and/or 
incorrect positions of the genome. For example, some 150-bp short reads will be contained within the 
rRNA operon and will therefore align to multiple places, making the operon a repeat and impairing 
the ability of polishers to repair errors. With 20 kbp long reads, however, all can span the rRNA 
operon and therefore align uniquely, so the operon is not a repeat, ensuring that polishing changes 
occur in the correct instances of the operon. 
Long-read polishing usually improves assembly accuracy, but a drop in accuracy is sometimes 
possible. It can therefore be unclear at this step whether the unpolished assembly, Medaka-polished 
assembly or some alternative (e.g. Clair3-polished) is best. ALE is a tool which quantifies the 
concordance between an assembly and a short-read set28, allowing one to assess the relative accuracy 
of different assemblies. We therefore recommend using ALE to guide the decision regarding which 
version of the assembly should progress to the next step (short-read polishing). 
Step 5: short-read polishing 
The previous steps have generated a long-read-only assembly of maximal accuracy, likely ~Q50 (one 
error per 100 kbp) if R10.4.1 ONT reads were used. The final step is to repair any remaining errors 
with short reads. For example, long homopolymers can be difficult for ONT sequencing to resolve14, 
but Illumina sequencing does not suffer from this problem12,29, so homopolymer-length errors which 
persist after long-read polishing can be fixed by short-read polishing. 
Our tool Polypolish30 was designed with two goals in mind. The first was to use all-per-read 
alignments to overcome some of the constraints imposed by repeats. The second was to be very 
conservative, i.e. to minimise the chance of introducing errors during polishing. Polypolish only makes 
changes that are unambiguously supported by the read alignments, so when there are multiple 
possibilities at a locus (e.g. a base could be A or C with some alignments supporting each), Polypolish 
will not change the sequence. For this reason, we recommend running Polypolish before any other 
short-read polisher. 
Due to its conservativeness, Polypolish may miss errors that other short-read polishers can fix, e.g. in 
regions of low Illumina depth. However, other polishers can introduce new errors30, which is 
unacceptable when aiming for perfection. We therefore recommend trying other short-read polishers 
but manually assessing any and all changes using a tool such as IGV31. Viewing the read alignments at 
a particular locus before/after polishing can clarify whether the change fixed an error (in which case it 
should be retained) or introduced an error (in which case it should be rejected)32. Polishers to try 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.5053
include POLCA33 (due to its low rate of introduced errors) and FMLRC234 (due to its ability to fix 
errors other polishers cannot). 
Automation 
The above-described method requires human judgement and interaction, particularly at the Trycycler 
and short-read polishing steps. This allows users to catch unexpected results, ensuring that poor data 
does not proceed to the next step. This method is appropriate where accuracy is paramount (e.g. 
reference genome assembly), but it cannot be run in an automated manner (e.g. with Nextflow35) and 
is thus not suitable for high-throughput assembly. 
If automation is required, changes in the workflow are needed. Flye19 is less likely than other long-
read assemblers to produce large-scale errors which downstream polishers may not be able to fix23, 
making it a good replacement for Trycycler. Before polishing with Medaka, circular Flye contigs 
should be ‘rotated’ to a consistent starting sequence (e.g. dnaA36) or random starting sequence. This 
will serve to move any duplicated/missing bases at the start/end of circular contigs to the middle of 
the sequence where polishing tools can repair the error. For short-read polishing, we recommend 
Polypolish followed by POLCA, as these tools are the least likely to introduce errors30. 
Users should not assume that automated assemblies are error-free. In particular, structural errors (e.g. 
fragmented replicons, doubled plasmids, etc.) are possible, as these are what Trycycler aims to avoid. 
Pitfalls 
Small plasmids (<20 kbp) can be underrepresented in ONT read sets, due to either ligation 
preparations (where circular sequences fail to acquire adapters13) or overly aggressive QC (e.g. 
discarding all reads <10 kbp). This can be avoided by using rapid preparations and less stringent QC 
(e.g. only discarding reads <1 kbp). Alternatively, small plasmids can be recovered from an Illumina-
only or short-read-first-hybrid assembly graph (e.g. from Unicycler4) where they usually appear as 
circular contigs separate from the rest of the genome (Figure 2A). 
Some bacterial taxa have undergone proliferation of insertion sequence elements in their evolution, 
resulting in genomes with hundreds of 1–2 kbp repeats37,38. Perfect assembly of such genomes can be 
challenging because short-read polishers struggle to repair errors in high-copy-number repeats 
(Figure 2B). For this reason, it is crucial to maximise ONT-only accuracy (using high ONT depth, 
R10.4.1 pores, ‘super’ basecalling and Medaka polishing) to minimise the number of errors left for 
short-read polishing to fix. Additionally, mate-pair Illumina sequencing may enable Polypolish to fix 
errors within repeat sequences by reducing the number of ambiguous short-read alignments39. 
While the ~5 kbp rRNA operon is the longest repeat in many bacterial genomes, longer repeats are 
possible. For example, Mycobacterium smegmatis mc2155 contains a 56 kbp duplication in its 
chromosome40. In such cases, typical ONT read lengths (~20 kbp) can be insufficient for assembly 
and ultra-long reads (~100 kbp) are needed (Figure 2C). 
Demultiplexing errors can occur in multiplexed sequencing runs: reads from one barcode can ‘leak’ 
into another, resulting in low-level contamination41. When a sequence in one barcode is very high 
depth, it may appear in other barcodes at sufficient depths to be assembled. This most often occurs 
with high-copy-number plasmids (Figure 2D), so when multiple genome assemblies from the same 
sequencing run contain identical plasmids, cross-barcode contamination should be considered as a 
possible cause. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.5053
Figure 2: examples of pitfalls in bacterial genome assembly and polishing. 
A. A. baumannii J913 contains one large 145 kbp plasmid (blue) and one small 6 kbp plasmid (red). The small 
plasmid is missing from an ONT-only assembly of this genome (left). However, it assembled completely in an 
Illumina-only assembly (right), enabling its recovery. 
B. IS481 is a repeat in the B. pertussis Tohama I genome42. Due to its high copy-number, some errors in this
repeat are not fixable using paired-end Illumina reads and short-read polishers.
C. If a genome contains a very long repeat, as is the case with M. smegmatis mc215540, typical ONT read lengths
of ~20 kbp may not be sufficient for complete assembly.
D. As occurred with Haemophilus M1C132_1 and K. oxytoca MSB1_2C5, read demultiplexing errors can cause a
deeply sequenced replicon in one genome (left) to erroneously appear in the assembly of another genome from
the same sequencing run (right).
E. ONT sequencing of K. pneumoniae INF27743 contained a near-50:50 mixture of fim switch orientations, causing
problems during long-read and short-read polishing.
F. S. aureus JKD61596 read sets contained structural heterogeneity around the ΦSa3 bacteriophage sequence 
(left), causing an incomplete Flye assembly graph (right). 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.5053
Heterogeneity occurs when there is not a single underlying genome but rather a mixture of two or 
more alternatives. This can occur at small scales (e.g. a mixture of different bases at a locus) or large 
scales (e.g. a mixture of structural configurations). When heterogeneity occurs at a low level (e.g. 95% 
of the reads support one sequence and 5% another), it does not typically cause problems as 
assemblers/polishers will use the more common alternative. However, balanced heterogeneity (e.g. a 
50:50 mixture) can cause misassemblies and polishing mistakes. The phase variation of the fim switch 
is one cause of heterogeneity in Enterobacteriaceae44 (Figure 2E). Another common example occurs 
with bacteriophages, which can integrate into and excise from bacterial chromosomes45 (Figure 2F). 
Heterogeneity can be identified by incomplete assembly graphs and dense clusters of changes made by 
a polisher. It may then be necessary to manually exclude reads which support one alternative, 
allowing the other alternative to assemble/polish cleanly. 
Conclusions 
In contrast to short-read-first hybrid assembly approaches of the past (e.g. Unicycler), our 
recommended method follows a long-read-first paradigm. Due to their improved handling of repeats, 
long reads form a solid assembly foundation, with short reads only used for final polishing. Using this 
approach, we believe perfect genome assemblies with zero errors are achievable. However, it is not 
easy to establish a ground truth genome sequence, so when assembly accuracy is critical, we 
recommend performing multiple alternative assemblies that vary in data/methods: sequencing 
platforms, assemblers in the Trycycler pipeline, read QC thresholds, short-read polishing tools, etc. 
When alternative data/methods produce identical assemblies, this builds confidence in their 
correctness. When alternative assemblies are not identical, further investigation (e.g. visualising read 
alignments in IGV) is warranted. 
While perfect bacterial genome assemblies are now possible, they are not yet simple to produce. The 
future will undoubtedly bring improvements to ONT chemistry, basecallers and polishers, but 
whether these will be sufficient for perfect ONT-only assemblies (negating the need for Illumina reads) 
remains to be seen. Further software developments are needed to remove the human-interaction 
elements, enabling perfect assemblies from a fully automated pipeline, even in complicated cases (e.g. 
genomes with heterogeneity). The ultimate goal is a future where genomes can be assembled to 
perfection with enough ease and reliability that it is taken for granted. 
References 
1.  Land M, Hauser L, Jun SR, Nookaew I, Leuze MR, Ahn TH, et al. Insights from 20 years of 
bacterial genome sequencing. Funct Integr Genomics. 2015;15(2):141–61.  
2.  Goodwin S, McPherson JD, McCombie WR. Coming of age: ten years of next-generation 
sequencing technologies. Nat Rev Genet. 2016;17(6):333–51.  
3.  Foster-Nyarko E, Cottingham H, Wick RR, Judd LM, Lam MMC, Wyres KL, et al. Nanopore-
only assemblies for genomic surveillance of the global priority drug-resistant pathogen, Klebsiella 
pneumoniae. bioRxiv. 2022;  
4.  Wick RR, Judd LM, Gorrie CL, Holt KE. Unicycler: resolving bacterial genome assemblies from 
short and long sequencing reads. Phillippy AM, editor. PLOS Comput Biol. 
2017;13(6):e1005595.  
5.  Wick RR, Judd LM, Cerdeira LT, Hawkey J, Méric G, Vezina B, et al. Trycycler: consensus 
long-read assemblies for bacterial genomes. Genome Biol. 2021;22(1):266.  
6.  Chua K, Seemann T, Harrison PF, Davies JK, Coutts SJ, Chen H, et al. Complete genome 
sequence of Staphylococcus aureus strain JKD6159, a unique Australian clone of ST93-IV 
community methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. J Bacteriol. 2010;192(20):5556–7.  
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.5053
7.  Maghini DG, Moss EL, Vance SE, Bhatt AS. Improved high-molecular-weight DNA extraction, 
nanopore sequencing and metagenomic assembly from the human gut microbiome. Nat Protoc. 
2021;16(1):458–71.  
8.  Branton D, Deamer DW. Nanopore Sequencing: An Introduction. World Scientific Publishing 
Company; 2019.  
9.  Wick RR, Judd LM, Gorrie CL, Holt KE. Completing bacterial genome assemblies with 
multiplex MinION sequencing. Microb Genomics. 2017;3(10).  
10.  Shafin K, Pesout T, Lorig-Roach R, Haukness M, Olsen HE, Bosworth C, et al. Nanopore 
sequencing and the Shasta toolkit enable efficient de novo assembly of eleven human genomes. 
Nat Biotechnol. 2020;38(9):1044–53.  
11.  Espejo RT, Plaza N. Multiple ribosomal RNA operons in bacteria; their concerted evolution and 
potential consequences on the rate of evolution of their 16S rRNA. Front Microbiol. 
2018;9:1232.  
12.  Jain M, Koren S, Miga KH, Quick J, Rand AC, Sasani TA, et al. Nanopore sequencing and 
assembly of a human genome with ultra-long reads. Nat Biotechnol. 2018;36(4):338–45.  
13.  Wick RR, Judd LM, Wyres KL, Holt KE. Recovery of small plasmid sequences via Oxford 
Nanopore sequencing. Microb Genomics. 2021;7(8).  
14.  Sereika M, Kirkegaard RH, Karst SM, Michaelsen TY, Sørensen EA, Wollenberg RD, et al. 
Oxford Nanopore R10.4 long-read sequencing enables the generation of near-finished bacterial 
genomes from pure cultures and metagenomes without short-read or reference polishing. Nat 
Methods. 2022;19(7):823–6.  
15.  Wick RR. Filtlong. 2021.  
16.  Sato MP, Ogura Y, Nakamura K, Nishida R, Gotoh Y, Hayashi M, et al. Comparison of the 
sequencing bias of currently available library preparation kits for Illumina sequencing of 
bacterial genomes and metagenomes. DNA Res. 2019;26(5):391–8.  
17.  Chen S, Zhou Y, Chen Y, Gu J. fastp: an ultra-fast all-in-one FASTQ preprocessor. 
Bioinformatics. 2018;34(17):i884–90.  
18.  Koren S, Walenz BP, Berlin K, Miller JR, Bergman NH, Phillippy AM. Canu: scalable and 
accurate long-read assembly via adaptive k-mer weighting and repeat separation. Genome Res. 
2017;27(5):722–36.  
19.  Kolmogorov M, Yuan J, Lin Y, Pevzner PA. Assembly of long, error-prone reads using repeat 
graphs. Nat Biotechnol. 2019;37(5):540–6.  
20.  Chen Y, Nie F, Xie SQ, Zheng YF, Dai Q, Bray T, et al. Efficient assembly of nanopore reads 
via highly accurate and intact error correction. Nat Commun. 2021;12(1):60.  
21.  Hu J. NextDenovo. 2021.  
22.  Vaser R, Šikić M. Time- and memory-efficient genome assembly with Raven. Nat Comput Sci. 
2021;1(5):332–6.  
23.  Wick RR, Holt KE. Benchmarking of long-read assemblers for prokaryote whole genome 
sequencing. F1000Research. 2019;8(2138).  
24.  Wright C, Wykes M. Medaka.  
25.  Loman NJ, Quick J, Simpson JT. A complete bacterial genome assembled de novo using only 
nanopore sequencing data. Nat Methods. 2015;12(8):733–5.  
26.  Wick RR. Perfecting bacterial genome assembly. Monash University; 2022.  
27.  Symphonizing pileup and full-alignment for deep learning-based long-read variant calling. :14.  
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.5053
28.  Clark SC, Egan R, Frazier PI, Wang Z. ALE: a generic assembly likelihood evaluation 
framework for assessing the accuracy of genome and metagenome assemblies. Bioinformatics. 
2013;29(4):435–43.  
29.  Minoche AE, Dohm JC, Himmelbauer H. Evaluation of genomic high-throughput sequencing 
data generated on Illumina HiSeq and Genome Analyzer systems. Genome Biol. 
2011;12(11):R112.  
30.  Wick RR, Holt KE. Polypolish: short-read polishing of long-read bacterial genome assemblies. 
Schneidman-Duhovny D, editor. PLOS Comput Biol. 2022;18(1):e1009802.  
31.  Thorvaldsdottir H, Robinson JT, Mesirov JP. Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV): high-
performance genomics data visualization and exploration. Brief Bioinform. 2013;14(2):178–92.  
32.  Robinson JT, Thorvaldsdóttir H, Wenger AM, Zehir A, Mesirov JP. Variant review with the 
Integrative Genomics Viewer. Cancer Res. 2017;77(21):e31–4.  
33.  Zimin AV, Salzberg SL. The genome polishing tool POLCA makes fast and accurate corrections 
in genome assemblies. Ouzounis CA, editor. PLOS Comput Biol. 2020;16(6):e1007981.  
34.  Mak QC, Wick RR, Holt JM, Wang JR. Polishing de novo nanopore assemblies of bacteria and 
eukaryotes with FMLRC2. bioRxiv. 2022;  
35.  Di Tommaso P, Chatzou M, Floden EW, Barja PP, Palumbo E, Notredame C. Nextflow enables 
reproducible computational workflows. Nat Biotechnol. 2017;35(4):316–9.  
36.  Hunt M, Silva ND, Otto TD, Parkhill J, Keane JA, Harris SR. Circlator: automated 
circularization of genome assemblies using long sequencing reads. Genome Biol. 2015;16(1):294.  
37.  Register KB, Sanden GN. Prevalence and Sequence Variants of IS481 in Bordetella bronchiseptica: 
Implications for IS481-Based Detection of Bordetella pertussis. J Clin Microbiol. 2006;44(12):4577–
83.  
38.  Hawkey J, Monk JM, Billman-Jacobe H, Palsson B, Holt KE. Impact of insertion sequences on 
convergent evolution of Shigella species. Hughes D, editor. PLOS Genet. 2020;16(7):e1008931.  
39.  Wetzel J, Kingsford C, Pop M. Assessing the benefits of using mate-pairs to resolve repeats in de 
novo short-read prokaryotic assemblies. BMC Bioinformatics. 2011;12(1):95.  
40.  Wang XM, Galamba A, Warner DF, Soetaert K, Merkel JS, Kalai M, et al. IS1096-mediated 
DNA rearrangements play a key role in genome evolution of Mycobacterium smegmatis. 
Tuberculosis. 2008;88(5):399–409.  
41.  Wick RR, Judd LM, Holt KE. Deepbinner: Demultiplexing barcoded Oxford Nanopore reads 
with deep convolutional neural networks. Pertea M, editor. PLOS Comput Biol. 
2018;14(11):e1006583.  
42.  Parkhill J, Sebaihia M, Preston A, Murphy LD, Thomson N, Harris DE, et al. Comparative 
analysis of the genome sequences of Bordetella pertussis, Bordetella parapertussis and Bordetella 
bronchiseptica. Nat Genet. 2003;35(1):32–40.  
43.  Wyres KL, Hawkey J, Mirčeta M, Judd LM, Wick RR, Gorrie CL, et al. Genomic surveillance of 
antimicrobial resistant bacterial colonisation and infection in intensive care patients. BMC Infect 
Dis. 2021;21(1):683.  
44.  Schwan WR. Regulation of fim genes in uropathogenic Escherichia coli. World J Clin Infect Dis. 
2011;1(1):17.  
45.  Fogg PCM, Colloms S, Rosser S, Stark M, Smith MCM. New applications for phage integrases. J 
Mol Biol. 2014;426(15):2703–16.  
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.5053
This preprint was submitted under the following conditions: 
The authors declare that they are aware that they are solely responsible for the content of the preprint and
that the deposit in SciELO Preprints does not mean any commitment on the part of SciELO, except its
preservation and dissemination.
The authors declare that the necessary Terms of Free and Informed Consent of participants or patients in
the research were obtained and are described in the manuscript, when applicable.
The authors declare that the preparation of the manuscript followed the ethical norms of scientific
communication.
The authors declare that the data, applications, and other content underlying the manuscript are
referenced.
The deposited manuscript is in PDF format.
The authors declare that the research that originated the manuscript followed good ethical practices and
that the necessary approvals from research ethics committees, when applicable, are described in the
manuscript.
The authors declare that once a manuscript is posted on the SciELO Preprints server, it can only be taken
down on request to the SciELO Preprints server Editorial Secretariat, who will post a retraction notice in its
place.
The authors agree that the approved manuscript will be made available under a Creative Commons CC-BY
license.
The submitting author declares that the contributions of all authors and conflict of interest statement are
included explicitly and in specific sections of the manuscript.
The authors declare that the manuscript was not deposited and/or previously made available on another
preprint server or published by a journal.
If the manuscript is being reviewed or being prepared for publishing but not yet published by a journal, the
authors declare that they have received authorization from the journal to make this deposit.
The submitting author declares that all authors of the manuscript agree with the submission to SciELO
Preprints.
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
