A 
novel coronavirus, named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), emerged in China in the end of 
2019 and after less than 6 months its related disease (COVID-19) has already affected more than 6 million individuals in 
almost all countries worldwide. COVID-19 was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization on March 11, 2020, 
becoming one of the most challenging and concerning public health crisis faced by this generation.1-4

A striking feature of COVID-19 pandemic is that children and adolescents seem to be less frequently infected by SARS-CoV-2 
comparing to adults. Preliminary evidence also shows that, unlike influenza or respiratory syncytial virus, children do not play a 
critical role in SARS-CoV-2 transmission in the community.5 Furthermore, although most infected children and adolescents are 
asymptomatic or present mild symptoms, recent unexpected data showing the emergence of a late-onset severe inflammatory syn-
drome temporally associated with SARS-CoV-2 highlights the importance of continued surveillance around the world.6 

Data from laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 cases in Asia, Europe and North America, by age groups, showed that the prev-
alence of children and adolescents in these case series ranged from 1.0 to 1.7%. The clinical spectrum of pediatric COVID-19 is 
wide, ranging from asymptomatic to critically ill cases. Fever and cough were consistently the most common reported symptoms 
in these case series, although less frequently than in adults, followed by pharyngeal erythema, shortness of breath, rhinorrhea, nau-
sea, abdominal pain, vomiting and diarrhea. Additional symptoms reported included myalgia, tiredness, headache, anosmia and 
ageusia. More recently, variable cutaneous manifestations have been described in pediatric populations with COVID-19, includ-
ing erythematous rashes, urticaria, vesicular and chilblain-like lesions.7 

Leucopenia, lymphopenia and increased inflammatory markers (erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein or procal-
citonin) were the most frequently reported laboratorial findings in children and adolescents with COVID-19. Although data is 
limited comparing to adults, lymphopenia, high levels of C-reactive protein, procalcitonin, D-dimer and creatine kinase muscle 
and brain (MB) biomarkers were laboratorial findings associated with more severe disease.1-7 

Clinical course of COVID-19 in children and adolescents uncommonly resulted in life-threatening illness with severe 
outcomes. In the largest reported case series from USA, with information on hospitalization status, approximately 20% of 
the children and adolescents were hospitalized and 2% of them were admitted in Pediatric Intensive Care Units (PICU). 
Importantly, infants aged <1 year represented the age group with the highest percentage of hospitalization among COVID-19 
pediatric patients. Less than 1% of children and adolescents had severe COVID-19 with acute respiratory distress syndrome 
or multiorgan failure.8 

A recent study reporting the outcomes of children and adolescents with COVID-19 admitted to USA and Canadian PICU 
showed severe disease is less frequent, and early outcomes in children hospitalized are far better comparing to adults. Interestingly, 
among 46 children and adolescents (median age 13 years) admitted to the PICU, 40 (83%) were found to have chronic underly-
ing health conditions, 18 (38%) of them required invasive ventilatory support and only 2 (4.2%) died.9 

In the end of Abril, cases of a severe rare syndrome, tem-
porally associated with COVID-19, have been reported in 
children and adolescents, initially in Europe and then in 
North and Latin America. This syndrome, named multisys-
tem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C), occurs 
days to weeks after acute SARS-CoV-2 infection. The clinical 
characteristics of MIS-C share similar features with Kawasaki 
disease (KD), KD shock syndrome, macrophage activation 
syndrome (MAS) and toxic shock syndrome. Although many 
patients with MIS-C meet criteria for complete or incom-
plete KD, affected children were older, presented more intense 
inflammation and higher levels of markers of cardiac injury. 
A broad spectrum of presenting signs and symptoms and 
disease severity were observed among reported MIS-C cases, 
including persistent fever, gastrointestinal symptoms (abdom-
inal pain, vomiting, diarrhea), rash, conjunctivitis, progress-
ing in some cases to shock, myocarditis, acute heart failure 
and development of coronary artery aneurysms. Patients who 
have presented with this syndrome were, in general, previ-
ously healthy, and most of them have tested negative for 
SARS-CoV-2 RNA but positive for antibodies, suggesting an 
unbalanced immune response following SARS-CoV-2 infec-
tion. Laboratory findings include lymphocytopenia, increased 
inflammatory (C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation 
rate, D-dimer, ferritin) and cardiac biomarkers (troponin, 
brain natriuretic peptide [BNP]).6

Based on current evidence, older adults and people of all 
ages with underlying medical conditions, including severe 
obesity, chronic lung disease, cardiovascular disease, diabetes 
mellitus, chronic kidney disease, liver disease, active cancer, 
transplantation and immunocompromised have been asso-
ciated with poor clinical outcomes and higher fatality rates 
from COVID-19.1,3 

There are limited data on which underlying conditions in 
children and adolescents are associated with increased risk of 
infection or severe illness. Infants <1 year of age and children 
with chronic pulmonary diseases (including moderate to severe 
asthma), cardiovascular illnesses (including congenital heart 
disease), malignancy, immunosuppression and obesity appear 
to be at increased risk of severe disease.8-10 
Data of immunocompromised patients with autoimmune 
diseases and COVID-19 are scarce. Although the true risk of 
life-threatening complications of this emerging infectious dis-
ease for these chronic illnesses is not yet known, there are par-
ticular concerns regarding SARS-CoV-2 infection for patients 
treated with immunosuppressive, biological agents and dis-
ease-modifying antirheumatic drugs.11 

One of the most important Latin American reference centers 
for pediatric liver diseases and pediatric liver transplantation in 
Brazil described their experience with 169 non-transplant chil-
dren and adolescents suspected and tested for SARS‑CoV-2. 
Of note, 13/169 (8%) of them had laboratory-confirmed 
COVID‑19. All of them had mild COVID-19, except one that 
died due to a serious genetic syndrome. Furthermore, during 
the study period, none of 190 pediatric liver transplant patients 
had COVID-19.12

Overall morbidity and mortality of COVID-19 in pedi-
atric patients with cancer seem to be low. One of the larg-
est pediatric cancer programs in the USA, in New York city, 
reported that 20/178 (11%) children and adolescents with 
cancer had positive test for SARS-CoV-2. Only one patient 
with COVID-19 required noncritical hospitalization.13 
Malignancy in pediatric populations are generally aggressive, 
needing multiple chemotherapy or stem cell transplantation. 
Therefore, postponing these therapies are not recommended 
during COVID-19 pandemic.

Importantly, the long-term effects of this pandemic, with 
school closure and social isolation during quarantine/lock-
down for children and adolescents, may influence sedentary 
behavior and consumption of calories-dense comfort foods, 
increasing the risk of weight gain and contributing for met-
abolic and cardiovascular diseases, particularly among those 
living in urban districts.11

There are other challenges related to this pandemic in chil-
dren and adolescents. Non-pharmacological interventions have 
been an essential preventive measure, recommended by national 
and international public health authorities. Besides the risk 
of limited or even no education for children and adolescents 
during COVID-19 crisis, home confinements may induce 
longer screen time, physical inactivity, sleep abnormalities, 
increase alcohol intake risk and domestic violence, particu-
larly in adolescents. Drug adherence should also be reinforced 
for patients with preexisting chronic disease and their families 
due to risk of disease flare or disease damage. Patients with sus-
pected or confirmed COVID-19 must be strictly monitored 
for the possible risk of disease reactivation after the resolution 
of this viral infection.11

The overwhelmed public health systems by the COVID-
19 pandemic represents a serious risk for pediatric general 
health, limiting access of children and adolescents to basic 
health care, compromising immunization coverages and post-
poning consultations for patients with underlying conditions. 
Moreover, mental health burden and socio-economic issues 
may contribute for short and long-term negative outcomes in 
children and adolescents and their families. Acute stress, anx-
iety, mild to severe depression, post-traumatic stress disorder, 
and emotional exhaustion may be first diagnosed during or 
after COVID-19 pandemic. Thus, online mental health care 
delivery, using teleconsultation or telephone support lines, may 
be required for pediatric populations.14 

Identification of a safe and effective antiviral therapy, that 
could improve disease outcomes, has been object of extensive 
research worldwide. However, so far there are no convincing 
data showing that any of the several antivirals (protease inhibi-
tor lopinavir/ritonavir, remdesivir or favipiravir) that are being 
tested proved to be safe and efficacious against SARS-CoV-2. 
Moreover, it must be acknowledged that the majority of these 
trials have been performed in adults, with very limited data, 
if any, for most of the different candidate antiviral therapies 
in children.15 

It is also of paramount importance to have in mind that 
the overwhelming majority of children and adolescents with 
COVID-19, once infected, will develop a mild, self-limited 
form of disease. It means that a large number of patients would 
have to be treated in order to demonstrate the benefits of an 
antiviral, raising concerns of the potential adverse events asso-
ciated with this intervention. This way, it is our opinion that, 
given the lack of evidence supporting safety and efficacy of the 
current available drugs for the treatment of COVID-19 in chil-
dren and adolescents, only supportive care should be routinely 
recommended for the majority of cases. In selected cases, of 
severe disease presentations or potential risk for disease pro-
gression due to the presence of strong risk factors, the use of 
antiviral therapy might be considered on a case-by-case indi-
vidualized decision, assuming that the benefits outweigh risks 
of potential adverse events of the drug used. It is recommended 
that, ideally, these off-label antiviral therapies for COVID-19 
should occur as part of a clinical trial.

Post-exposure prophylaxis is another potential strategy for 
using antiviral therapies. In this context, a recent double-blind 
randomized trial tested the use of hydroxychloroquine within 
four days after the reported exposure. However, results did not 
show any effect of this drug on the prevention of illness com-
patible with COVID-19 or confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection 
when used as post-exposure prophylaxis.16

The most exciting and fascinating chapter of the bat-
tle against COVID-19 is undoubtedly the development of 
a safe and effective vaccine. We currently have more than 
130 candidate vaccines being developed, at least 10 of 
them already being tested in humans, using different vac-
cine platforms, including nucleic acid-based (mRNA and 
DNA), vector-based, and inactivated or recombinant pro-
tein vaccines. Studies performed with several vaccine strat-
egies against the other zoonotic coronavirus, SARS‑CoV 
and MERS-CoV, focused on the S protein target, paved the 
way to facilitate a more rapid development of the current 
SARS-CoV-2 vaccine.17 

Although significant progress has been made in a very 
short period of time, we still have several unanswered ques-
tions and challenges to the development of a vaccine against  
SARS-CoV-2, including the theoretical risk of Antibody-
Dependent-Enhancement, the lack of clear correlates of pro-
tection, the long-term persistence of the immune responses 
induced by vaccination, the number of vaccine doses required 
for different age groups, the probable need of adjuvants to trig-
ger TH1 response, and high neutralizing antibodies to spare 
antigen dosing. It is also difficult to anticipate whether these 
vaccines will provide protection against infection (which would 
also have the possibility to decrease transmission in the com-
munity once high coverage is achieved) or only prevent disease 
severity and/or death.17 

The role of a recent Bacille-Calmette-Guerin (BCG) immu-
nization in the prevention of COVID-19 is also being investi-
gated in clinical trials. Previous studies have shown that BCG 
immunization, besides its specific effect against severe forms of 
tuberculosis, induces a nonspecific protective immune response 
against other infections.17

In conclusion, almost six months into the COVID-19 
pandemic, its epicenter has displaced from China, Europe 
and USA to Brazil, exposing our vulnerable population to 
devastating consequences. Despite the fact that children and 
adolescents appear to have lower prevalence, milder clinical 
manifestations and lower fatality rates, compared to other 
age groups, COVID-19 global crisis has a potentially pro-
found, long-term negative impact on pediatric populations. 
The recent identification of rare and severe inflammatory 
syndrome cases of COVID-19 in older children and ado-
lescents highlights its unpredictable pathogenesis spectrum 
and outcomes. Mental health burden, social impact and 
financial loss are important challenges for children and ado-
lescents of this and future generations. Further multicenter 
and longitudinal pediatrics studies with large populations 
will be necessary to clarify these findings and to evaluate 
specific healthy and preexisting chronic diseases in children 
and adolescents. 

This study was supported by grants from Conselho Nacional 
de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq 
303422/2015-7 to CAS), Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa 
do Estado de São Paulo (FAPESP 2015/03756-4 to CAS), 
and by Núcleo de Apoio à Pesquisa “Saúde da Criança e do 
Adolescente” da USP (NAP-CriAd) to CAS.
