The outbreak of novel SARS-COV2, which started in China late 2019, rapidly gained the
pandemic status.
Mathematical models are required to have good accuracy in predicting the
oubreak evolution, to allow governments and local authorities to take actions aiming at minimizing
the damage for the public health. In the current context there are many uncertainties concerning
the parameters entering the SIR model. Here we analyse the evolution of the death rate coeﬃcient
in Italy, USA and Brazil. Experimental data supports the conclusion that it is decreasing over time.

The epidemic outbreak leading to the so-called COVID-19 disease, caused by the novel
coronavirus SARS-COV2, had started in the late 2019, in the province of Hubei, China.
The exact date and location of patient zero is still uncertain, but given the high contagon
rate it quickly disseminated throughout the world, being declared pandemic by the World
Health Organization (WHO) in March 2020. Within this scenario, mathematical models
are crucial in making predictons allowing governments and local authorities to take safety
measures aiming at minimizing the potential damaged that can be caused to the population
and the health systems [1]. These models are based on the so-called susceptible-infected-
recovered (SIR) model and its variants [2–5], but key parameters entering it, such as infection
and mortality rate coeﬃcients, suﬀered from enormous uncertainties at the very beginning,
rendering predictions which missed the target by far. The Imperial College London model
predicted in early March 2020 more than 500 thosands of deaths in the UK and more than
2 millions in the USA [6, 7]. Therefore, it takes time, while the epidemic unfolds, for a
reliable amount of experimental evidence to be collected, allowing the model parameters to
be known with less uncertainty. It must be emphasized that there are still many doubts
about the correct model to be used in describing the time evolution of SARS-COV2 epidemic
process, but it is relatively safe to assume that an infected person which recovered become
immune, at least in the time window being considered.

In the present paper we will analyse the evolution of the death rate coeﬃcient µ in Italy,
USA and Brazil.
Current data supports the conclusion that it is decreasing over time,
obeying an exponential law for suﬃciently large time scales. The causes for that behavior,
to the best of our knowledge, are unknown.

For the sake of simplicity we will take as the starting point the SIRD model, whose
equations are written below:
dS
dt = −αSI ,
(1)
dI
dt = αSI −1
τ I −µI ,
(2)
dR
dt
= 1
τ I ,
(3)
dD
dt
= µI ,
(4)
where S(t), I(t), R(t) and D(t) correspond to the susceptible, actively infected, recovered
and dead populations, respectively. For a time scale smaller than 2 years we can neglect
the populational growth for our purposes here. This way, the total population P0 at t = 0
is susceptible, but for time t the constancy of P0 = S(t) + I(t) + R(t) + D(t) holds. The
model parameters are the transmission rate coeﬃcient α, the average recovery time τ and
the mortality rate coeﬃcient µ. These input parameters can be time-dependent. The set of
equations can be renormalized by P0, yielding relative values. This way, the transmission
rate coeﬃcient must be renormalized to α′ = αP0.

From equation (4) we obtain:
µ(t) = dD(t)/dt
I(t)
,
(5)
where dD(t)/dt it the daily death rate while I(t) it the actively infected population. Data
is taken from the website Worldometer [8], which aggregates information on the coronavirus
pandemic worldwide, until July 18th 2020. The moving averages for a 7-day period are
being considered, which remove the fast variations that seem to come mainly from the lag
in numbers accumulated during the weekends and released latter.

The time evolution of the SARS-COV2 outbreak in the USA is displayed in Figure 1.
The time t = 0 corresponds to the day when the total number of active cases surpassed 100.
Looking at Figure 1-(a) one can see a plateau forming in the interval 80 < t < 100 days, the
a rapid growing in the active cases is observed. However, the daily deaths, measured by the
death rate dD/dt did not increased proportionally, as illustrated in Figure 1-(b). As a matter
of fact, it has been decreasing since t = 50 days. The mortality rate coeﬃcient calculated
with the known data is decreasing exponentially and can be well ﬁtted for suﬃciently long
time (t > 30 days) by an exponential funcion of the form µ(t) = 10−4 + 1.5 × 10−2e−t/30.
Assuming the uncertainty in total number of deaths is far lower than in the real active cases,
since there are a large number of asymptomatic of mildly aﬀected patients which go under
the radar of oﬃcial data, the absolute value of µ(t) suﬀers from an uncertainty of one or two
orders of magnitude. It has been estimated that the real number of active cases can be 10
to 100 times the registered cases worldwide.

Similar conclusions can be drawn using data from Brazil and Italy, shown in Figures
2 and 3, also displaying an exponential decay behavior for µ(t) at large time scale. The
relaxation time in these cases is around 30 days. USA and Brazil have in common their
vast territorial area, much larger than the area of Italy, making it diﬃcult to apply the SIR
model neglecting spatial variations for USA and Brazil. From current date, the outbreak
is near the end in Italy, as can be seen clearly from Figures 3-(a) and 3-(b). Initially, it
was thought that ∼67% of the population should be infected to obtain herd immunity, but
novel models taking into account population heterogeneity signiﬁcantly lowers that number
to ∼40% or less [9, 10]. Nonetheless, the general behavior of µ(t) among the three countries
is very similar until now, and the behaviour can be modeled as µ(t) = A + Be−t/t0.

Going further, we tried to ﬁt the evolution of the outbreak in Italy, using the function
µ(t) = 10−3 + 3 × 10−2e−t/30 for the mortality rate coeﬃcient. In equations (1)-(4) we used
α′ = 0.14, adjusted for the ﬁtting, τ is taken to be 14 days, based on publicly available
information related to the averaged recovery time. For simulations, we set the normalized
initial conditions to I0 = 10−2, D0 = 0, R0 = 0, and a total susceptible population of P0 = 5
millions. A better ﬁtting at the end of the outbreak was aimed. Figures 4-(a) to 4-(c) display
the time evolution. The total number of deaths can be calculated integrating (4), leading
to the following:
Df =
Z tf
0
µ(t)I(t)dt ,
(6)
which yielded a total of 36 × 103 deaths at the end of the outbreak, not far from the real
value.

The success obtained using a very simple model for the case of Italy encouraged us to
simulate the outbreak time evolution for Brazil. Certainly, the obtained results cannot be
taken too much seriously, mainly due to country’s gigantic territorial extension. Improve-
ments to the model aiming to include geographical aspects could be done quite easily. The
results of the SIR model simulations for Brazil are shown in Figures 5-(a) to 5-(c), con-
sidering α′ = 0.135, τ = 14 days, I0 = 4 × 10−4 and a susceptible population of P0 = 50
millions. This way, the predicted total number of deaths can reach 120, 000 at the end of
the outbreak, but it can to be underestimated, given the current scenario in Brazil [11].

In conclusion, taking the current available data on the SARS-COV2 outbreak into con-
sideration, it seems plausible that the mortality rate coeﬃcient is decreasing over time. The
real caused for that are unknown, to the best of our knowledge, but a few hypotheses can
be put forward, to be known: i) unreliability of the available data, mainly at the beginning
of the outbreak process in the various regions, when the total number of active cases is
much more uncertain and can be easily underestimated; ii) natural processes, some of them
related to mutations weakening of the virus during transmission.

C.A. Dartora would like to thank the Brazilian agency CNPq for partial ﬁnancial support
through grant number 301848/2017-3.
