Status: Preprint has been published in a journal as an article
DOI of the published article: https://doi.org/10.47577/technium.v2i7.1681
COVID-19 dynamical evolution prediction in Mexico, decision
making and social implementation: mid/low income countries
study
Saasil Fernandez-Erana, Labna Fernandez-Erana, Manuel Fernandez-Guasti
DOI: 10.1590/SciELOPreprints.1138
This preprint was submitted under the following conditions: 
The authors declare that they are aware that they are solely responsible for the content of the preprint and
that the deposit in SciELO Preprints does not mean any commitment on the part of SciELO, except its
preservation and dissemination.
The authors declare that the research that originated the manuscript followed good ethical practices and
that the necessary approvals from research ethics committees are described in the manuscript, when
applicable.
The authors declare that the necessary Terms of Free and Informed Consent of participants or patients in
the research were obtained and are described in the manuscript, when applicable.
The authors declare that the preparation of the manuscript followed the ethical norms of scientific
communication.
The authors declare that the manuscript was not deposited and/or previously made available on another
preprint server.
The submitting author declares that all authors responsible for preparing the manuscript agree with this
deposit.
The authors declare that in the event that this manuscript has previously been submitted to a journal and
being evaluated, they have received the journal's consent to make the deposit on the SciELO Preprints
server.
The submitting author declares that all authors' contributions are included on the manuscript.
The authors declare that if the manuscript is posted on the SciELO Preprints server, it will be available
under a Creative Commons CC-BY license.
The deposited manuscript is in PDF format.
If the manuscript is being reviewed and published by a journal, the authors declare that they have received
authorization from the journal to make this deposit.
Submitted on (YYYY-MM-DD): 2020-08-23
Posted on (YYYY-MM-DD): 2020-10-16
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
COVID-19 dynamical evolution prediction in
Mexico, decision making and social
implementation: mid/low income countries
study.
S. Fernandez-Erana, L. Fernandez-Erana, M. Fernandez-Guasti
August 24, 2020
Lab. de Óptica Cuántica, Depto. de Física,
Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana - Iztapalapa,
C.P. 09340 Ciudad de México, Ap. postal. 55-534, MEXICO
e-mail: mfg@xanum.uam.mx, url: https://luz.izt.uam.mx
ORCID SFE: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3504-5623, LFE:
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1859-9667, MFG:
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1839-6002
Abstract
A normal distribution approach is implemented to predict the evolu-
tion of the COVID-19 epidemic. The t to the COVID-19 daily cases in
Mexico, in the rising stage of the epidemic, is a very good continuous ap-
proximation to the data with R2 = 0.976. The derivative of this function
provides a measure of the increase/decrease or acceleration of new cases
per day that are otherwise buried in the noise of the raw data. The predic-
tions are depicted in a novel 3D way, so as to convey the evolution of the
forecasts as data becomes available. The estimations are in accordance
within standard deviation, with the logistic and Gompertz functions tted
to the corresponding epidemic models. This scheme can be used to model
the epidemic and use it as an ancillary for decision making at a municipal
or regional level. Simplicity with robust prediction is favoured, so that the
model can be understood and implemented by local government advisors
or personnel not familiar with specialized statistical methods.
Keywords: Epidemic models; Coronavirus; COVID-19; Infectious disease con-
trol;
1
1
Introduction
The evolution of epidemics has been modeled with diverse mathematical func-
tions to predict the various features of the collective disease, in particular, the
date when the infectious peak will occur and the maximum number of new
cases. Dierent models have focused on diverse issues, for example, robustness
under uctuations from day-to-day data [1], international spreading [2], etc.
For a recent historical account of epidemic models see [3]. The deterministic
approach, from the mathematical point of view, establishes a set of partial dif-
ferential equations, considering the most relevant features of the propagation of
the disease. The solutions to this set of equations can be tackled analytically
or numerically, depending on the complexity of the set (SIR, SIRS, SEIRS...)
[4, 5]. In general, better ts to the data can be obtained with a larger number of
parameters. Two highly relevant problems are the sensitivity of the dierential
equations to the initial conditions and the weighing of the factors according to
dierent criteria or the available data. An example of the latter is the diculty
of accurately establishing the all important basic reproductive number R0, in
particular at the early stages of the epidemic [6].
To solely predict the future course of an epidemic, models with a fewer number
of parameters can have some advantages over more sophisticated models. The
number of coecients that need to be known is greatly reduced or can even be
avoided. Analytical solutions can be obtained for continuous-time models to
describe the new or the cumulative number of cases. These analytic functions
can be readily derived or integrated to obtain other quantities such as the accel-
eration of the spreading. Furthermore, the implementation and understanding
of the model can be eciently performed by non-specialists.
These benets
have of course, a price. Besides the forecasting of the epidemic evolution as a
function of time, no information is shed onto the underlying mechanisms nor
the ways to modify them. Nonetheless, if the emphasis is laid on prediction,
as in the present work, the assets can exceed the limitations for a rapid and
reliable assessment of the epidemic forecasting.
Epidemic predictions are of paramount importance in order to implement dif-
ferent policies to lessen the impact of the disease [7]. On this basis, national and
local governments, for example, increase the availability of the hospitals infras-
tructure, ban certain activities [8], recommend social distancing [9] and other
schemes to prevent person-to-person transmission [10]. The relevance of atten-
ing the curves when limited resources are available hardly needs to be stressed
[11]. The lack of preparedness in mid/low income countries worldwide to face a
large scale epidemic is evident from numerous reports [12]. The indirect increase
of mortality due to potential disruption of health systems and decreased access
to food could be devastating [13]. Severe problems undermine the readiness of
countries in Latin America to face the spread of COVID-19 [14], in particular,
due to very modest public healthcare systems in most countries of the region.
The impact on the Caribbean, possibly except for Cuba, is expected to be se-
vere [15]. The lack of investment in the last decades in the healthcare system in
2
Mexico has become evident with the emergency [16]. COVID-19 patients with
associated chronic conditions and multimorbidity in Mexico, increase pneumo-
nia and death rates [17]. Therefore, timely assessment and reliable prediction
of the epidemic evolution at the various levels of governance is invaluable to
ameliorate the handling of the health crisis.
In the present paper, a normal distribution is used to model the pandemic
evolution. The reason for this choice is threefold, on the one hand, the derivative
as well as the integral of the Gaussian function, permits the visualization of the
change in the spreading speed as well as the total number of cases. The spreading
acceleration is a variable that has been largely ignored, but, as we will show, it
is a very sensitive function that can be of help in decision making. On the other
hand, keeping the number of parameters to the minimum of three, the model
leaves no room for parameters that can be hard to assess [18], in particular
at the early stages of the epidemic.
Thirdly, simplicity is favoured for the
sake of clarity, so that the model can be understood and implemented locally
by researchers or personnel that are not necessarily familiar with specialized
mathematical procedures nor sophisticated statistical models.
The method is presented and exemplied here with COVID-19 data from Mex-
ico, as the epidemic evolved from March to mid July. In section 2, results of
the Gaussian t to the number of new conrmed cases at a specic date are
presented. The t gives the maximum expected number of daily cases, the time
when this maximum is expected and the foreseen duration of the disease. The
cumulative cases function is obtained from direct integration of this curve. The
derivative of the Gaussian curve is shown to be a valuable tool to establish
how fast the spreading is increasing or decreasing. In section 3, rather than
just a snapshot, the results are presented in a novel fashion, to show the way
the outcome changed as a function of the time when the prediction was made.
These time-time 3D plots show the dynamic evolution of the prediction as a
function of data availability. In section 4, the possibilities of implementation of
this technique at a local level and even within micro regions are explored. In
the last section, the present approach is compared with other methods. Let us
anticipate that the present model is surprisingly accurate compared with more
sophisticated models.
2
Normal distribution t to the COVID-19 evo-
lution
The rate at which a disease is aecting a population can be measured with dif-
ferent parameters or criteria. The denitions vary according with the emphasis
required, for example, geographical dissemination [19], percentage of infected
population [20], etc. A further diculty arises if case denitions are modied as
the epidemic evolves, as has happened with COVID-19 in China, where seven
versions were issued within three months [21]. A widely adopted denition is the
3
number of new cases in a given interval, usually reported per day. This is the
raw data used in this work. Daily conrmed new cases in Mexico were obtained
from the 'Secretaría de Salud' of the Mexican government [22] and conrmed
with other sources [23].
The number of new daily COVID-19 cases is considered a random variable. Due
to the central limit theorem, the average of many observations with nite mean
and variance is itself a random variable whose distribution converges to a normal
distribution as the number of samples increases. This variable, in a stochastic
Markovian epidemic model in continuous time with maximum entropy, will ex-
hibit a normal distribution. The number of new daily COVID-19 cases is the
result of many independent particular situations, and as such, its distribution is
expected to be nearly normal. The continuous variable of daily conrmed new
cases, labeled with the letter N, is modeled by a Gaussian function of the form
N = Nmax exp
 
−(t −tmax)2
w2
!
,
(1)
where Nmax represents the prediction of the average maximum number of new
cases at the highest infection rate, tmax the prediction of the time when the
highest infection rate will occur, and w is a measure of the duration of the
disease measured from the time when the infection rate grows from 1/e to its
maximum value.
Figure 1: Gaussian t (Green curve) to conrmed new COVID-19 cases in
Mexico evaluated with data from 18 March up to 18 July (red dot) 2020. The
three parameters obtained from the t are the number of new conrmed cases
at the peak Nmax, the date of maximum rate of new cases tmax and the duration
of the disease w, measured half width at 1/e. In this graph 2w is 130.6 days.
Condence bands at 95% for mean predictions are depicted in light brown.
4
The values of the three parameters Nmax, tmax and w were obtained from a least
squares t of the Gaussian function to the data starting from 18 March 2020
to the indicated date. In Figure 1, the t was performed with data up to 18
July. The R2 value of the t is a respectable 0.976, conrming that the Gaussian
function is a good continuous approximation to the data. The parameters values
with their uncertainties are shown in Table 1.
Estimate
Std. error
P-value
Nmax
6459.9 (cases per day)
263.5
1.5 × 10−48
tmax
128.1 (days from 18 March)
5.1
3.1 × 10−49
w
65.3 (days)
4.1
4.2 × 10−31
Table 1: Parameter estimation diagnostics obtained for a linear regression t to
the Gaussian function shown in gure 1. Fit performed with 123 data points
beginning 18 March.
The number of conrmed new cases per day N, is a measure of the spreading
velocity of the infected cases.
Thus, Nmax represents the prediction of the
average velocity of infections at the highest infection rate.
The Gaussian function integrates to the error function. This function has to be
shifted, so that the initial condition corresponds to zero cases at −∞, at least in
the rst appearance of the disease before successive outbreaks. The cumulative
cases function is
Ncum =
Z
N dt = π
2 Nmax w erf
(t −tmax)
w

−π
2 Nmax w erf (−∞) ,
(2)
where Ncum is the cumulative number of COVID-19 cases as shown in gure 2.
This integral estimates the total number of cases from the Gaussian t. This
quantity can of course be obtained, without invoking the t, from the sum of
all cases up to date. Comparison of the total number of cases obtained from the
raw data and the t, gives a crude conrmation that the t is being correctly
evaluated. The cumulative number of cases from the raw data was 338,913 on
18 July [23]. Whereas the result from the integral of the t given by Equation
(2) is 339,887 cases, that amounts to a 0.3 % discrepancy.
2.1
Daily increase/decrease
An estimate of the new cases increase or decrease can be evaluated from the
data by subtracting the number of new cases from two contiguous days. Some
web sites, like the World Health Organization, actually show the 'Daily In-
crease/Decrease' directly in their tooltip [23]. This is plotted in gure 3. The
daily reports have a large variability because data have to be collected from
5
Figure 2: Prediction of cumulative COVID-19 cases in Mexico evaluated from
the integral of the Gaussian function. Estimation on 18 July was 339,887 cases.
The number of cumulative cases expected at the end of the disease Ncum (∞),
is 744,245.
dierent geographical regions with diverse infrastructure and communications.
Weekdays or weekends as well as dierent time zones also play a role in the
variations of these reports. The uctuations in the day to day increase/decrease
is so large, that hardly any information can be obtained from this plot. This
is perhaps a reason why little attention has been paid to rate of change of
new daily cases. Moreover, more sophisticated models usually have solutions
whose derivatives are not so simple to evaluate. The derivative of the Gaussian
function is
a = dN
dt = −2Nmax
(t −tmax)
w2
exp
 
(t −tmax)2
w2
!
.
(3)
This function evaluates how fast is the rate of infections increasing or decreasing.
The result obtained from the derivative of the t gives a smooth curve as shown
in Figure 4, in contrast with the discrete data shown in Figure 3. This curve is
highly sensitive to the stage at which the pandemia has evolved. For example,
the inection points in the new cases curve (Figure 1) are readily spotted as the
maximum and minimum in the derivative curve (Figure 4). In physics parlance,
a = dN
dt represents the acceleration (or deceleration) of new infections. However,
we have to train a little bit to understand and read the graph correctly. Notice
that the ordinates scale is more than an order of magnitude smaller than its
counterpart obtained directly from the raw data. Suppose, as a mere exercise,
that a given place has an infrastructure such that it can deal with, say, 1000
new patients per day. Consider one bed with the appropriate resources for each
patient. For simplicity, consider that the number of discharged patients is the
same as the incoming patients in the previous day. In a typical curve, shown
in Figure 4, at the acceleration peak (7 June), 85 beds have to be increased
6
Figure 3: Increment/decrement raw data of new cases with respect to previous
day from 18 March to 18 July. Scarce relevant information can be obtained from
this plot due to the large daily variability. (Compare with gure 4, in particular
the ordinates scale)
each day. At the maximum of new cases, i.e. the maximum of the bell shaped
curve, the acceleration is zero and thus, no more beds need to be added to
the infrastructure.
The acceleration curve crosses the abscissas axis at this
maximum, being very sharp about the moment when this happens (23 July in
Figure 4). As the calamity evolves past the disease peak, the negative values of
acceleration suggest that a number of COVID-19 beds that can be dismantled.
3
Prediction as a function of data availability
The predicted evolution of the epidemic is usually a snapshot at a given date
evaluated with the latest available data. The prediction uncertainty is usually
visualized by drawing bands surrounding the t. This uncertainty, as it is well
known, increases as the prediction curve lies further away from the evaluation
time [24]. Day after day frozen images are produced as data becomes available
each day or according with the interval when information is updated. Previous
day or past predictions are discarded since the prediction becomes more accurate
when more data are available. However, the way the prediction evolves is also
important, in particular, if the results exhibit dierent behaviours at dierent
stages of the epidemic.
A very interesting way of visualizing the dynamics of the prediction rather than
just snapshots, is to consider the parameters of the t as a function of the day
when the prediction was performed. The primary parameters of the Gaussian
t are the maximum expected number of cases Nmax, the time tmax when the
7
Figure 4: Increment/decrement of new cases prediction for Mexico as a function
of time, obtained from the derivative of the new cases Gaussian t. Typical ac-
celeration curve evaluated on 18 July (red dot) corresponding to the parameters
in Table 1 and Figure 1.
maximum is expected to be reached and the expected duration of the disease
w.
In Figure 5, a three dimensional plot shows the way the predictions evolved from
day to day. The expected maximum number of cases Nmax and the date when
this maximum is achieved tmax are plotted as a function of the day teval, when the
prediction was made. Thus we have a time-time plot with height representing
Nmax. The triad (teval, tmax, Nmax), evinces the way the prediction changed as
data was incorporated to the t. The earliest data that we recorded for Mexico
was 18 March 2020. For a time of evaluation teval, the number of data points is
teval minus the initial recording date. In Figure 5, the rst prediction was made
8 May 2020, with 53 data points; Whereas the last prediction is 18 July 2020,
with 123 data points. There is a correlation between dates further away from
the evaluation date and the maximum number of new cases. The maximum
peak was expected around 10 May, in the evaluations performed during the
rst days of May. However, the peak date was shifted to the second fortnight in
June in subsequent evaluations. The change in the maximum expectation date
moved from mid July until the second fortnight in July.
4
Implementation of the model at micro level
There are global policies at a multinational level coordinated by the World
Health Organization (WHO). At the next scale, nations establish their own
policies, that it is worth mentioning, regarding the COVID-19 epidemic, have
8
Figure 5: Nmax and tmax predictions are plotted as a function of teval, the day
when the prediction was made. These time-time plots evince the dynamical
evolution of the predictions.
been quite diverse. Moving onto smaller units, depending on the geopolitical di-
visions of the countries, there are states, counties and other mid sized structures.
These in turn are divided in municipalities or districts with a huge diversity of
population and geographical sizes. The local attributes of the smaller structures
vary enormously for dierent countries. Two examples in Latin America: Brazil
currently has 5,570 municipalities and healthcare is in their responsibility [14].
In Mexico, there are 32 states and 2,457 municipalities; Healthcare and health
decision making has been shifting to and from the national level to the state
level with various degrees of success/failure. In a recent survey of Canadian
municipalities, the aggressiveness of policy responses is strongly related to mu-
nicipal population size and case totals and modestly related to province and
local ideology [25].
In Mexico, most of the COVID-19 information is processed at a national level
with the exception of some large metropolitan areas. Much fewer information, if
any, is processed at the local municipal level. Nonetheless, some municipalities
have taken local decisions regarding the COVID-19, for example, banning the
entrance of people in the municipality or rejecting the installation of emergency
COVID-19 mobile hospitals. Furthermore, few non government organizations or
civil society members make use or generate local information to establish their
stance at the problem or take the desirable or necessary measures to minimize
9
the risks.
It is desirable that the local governments as well as the population have appro-
priate and opportune information regarding the disease. Decisions will be wiser
if the local as well as the global information are adequately processed and ex-
pounded to the decision makers as well as the population. Central governments
can process information at a global or intermediate level, but it is unfeasible to
centrally process information at the micro-level. For these reasons, it is desirable
that at the micro-level, people can make sense of the information that is being
collected locally and be able to compare it with global trends. A deplorable
practice all around the world at various government levels has been censorship
and deliberate bias regarding the COVID-19 epidemic [26]. Locally generated
knowledge can help to counteract banned or distorted information.
The present scheme could make a small but relevant contribution in order
to evaluate the COVID-19 prospective at this micro-level. Locally generated
knowledge can be a complementary information to the global trends, so that at
the micro level, communities can understand what is happening in their imme-
diate surroundings. This local knowledge can help decision makers at the micro
level to make wiser decisions based on evidence and well founded prediction.
With the present development of this work, it is necessary for some members
of the local community to have rudiments of curve tting and interpretation
of graphs. Any mathematics software that can perform linear regressions and
visualization is all that is required, in addition of course, of the local data of new
infected cases. The program used in this work is cloned in the supplementary
material. It is foreseeable that a web applet can be implemented so that micro
communities could feed local data via a web browser and obtain prediction val-
ues and graphs over the internet. The former scheme requires a maths software
whereas the latter requires an internet connection.
5
Comparison of results and discussion
At the Institute of Physics, UNAM, the peak of COVID-19 in Mexico with al-
most 6000 new cases was predicted to be 27 June, using the logistic function
and considering data up to 23 May [24]. The peak prediction, with the normal
distribution function in the present work for the same data set, was 1 July with
4448 new cases at the peak. There is a mere four day dierence between these
two estimations although Nmax diers by 26%. Several groups working in close
association with the Mexican government are CIMAT-Gompertz, CIMAT-IM-
UNAM, CONACYT-CRIP, IMSS and CDMX epidemic model. The CIMAT-
Gompertz group estimated the peak time at 29 June with just under 4000 new
cases per day, evaluated up to 1 June [27]. The present model predicted the
peak time at 26 June with 4694 new cases with data up to 4 June. The CDMX
epidemic group approach is based on a SEIR model with nine coupled par-
tial dierential equations, in order to include hospital patients with dierent
10
infrastructure requirements. Their published predictions are centered on the
health infrastructure requirements in Mexico city area [28]. The CIMAT-IM
AMA model is a compartmental SEIRD model aimed at forecasting hospital
occupancy in metropolitan areas in the 32 states of the country [29]. Unfor-
tunately their report does not include a national forecast. Comparison with
publicly available results from the other groups come from the 'Secretaría de
Salud' spokesman [30]. Roughly, in late April and early May, the peak was
predicted around 10 May. However, it has been subsequently shifted towards
late July. In view of the before mentioned comparisons, the present method
shows peak time and maximum new cases predictions that are consistent with
calculations by other models.
The expected duration of the epidemic is another matter. Behaviour past the
maximum varies greatly depending on the region and the regional policies.
While some places exhibit a plateau (i.e.
Russian Federation), others have
a steady exponential like decrease (i.e. Italy, that may nonetheless experience
a dierent behavior in the coming weeks [31]), and yet others have a second
outbreak shortly afterwards (i.e. Republic of Korea). If the propagation condi-
tions are varied, quantities that are assumed constant in the models have to be
modied. It is then necessary to solve the equations for time varying parameters
(rather complex) or to evaluate piece-wise solutions for segments with constant
parameters. The present method is not well suited for these purposes. The
normal distribution is symmetric, although piece-wise asymmetric solutions can
be implemented.
The normal t to the COVID-19 daily cases in Mexico suggests that Gaus-
sian ts can be successfully used to predict the peak number of new cases per
day and the time the peak is likely to occur. The normal increase/decrease or
acceleration curve of new cases per day provides a valuable tool to assess the
pandemic evolution. Three dimensional plots showing the way forecasts evolve
as data becomes available, exhibit the dynamical evolution of the predictions.
The use of this model together with the data visualization tools are a comple-
mentary decision making instrument that should be encouraged. The simplicity
of the model makes it a good candidate to be implemented at a municipal level,
particularly in mid/low income countries where specialized human resources at
a local level are scarce.
Contributors
Data analysis was led by MFG. SFE provided the data from online sources. LFE
and SFE programmed the model and the corresponding visualizations. All au-
thors contributed to processing and interpreted the study ndings, contributed
to writing the manuscript, and approved the nal version for publication.
11
Declaration of interests
We declare no competing interests.
Data Availability Statement
The data that support the ndings of this study are openly available in supple-
mentary les.
Acknowledgements
The authors are greatly indebted to Prof. A. Fernández-Guasti for discussions
of paramount importance to the manuscript and relevant references.
References
[1] K. Senel, M. Ozdinc, and S. Ozturkcan. Spe approach for robust estimation
of SIR model with limited and noisy data: The case for COVID-19. Disaster
Medicine and Public Health Preparedness, pages 122, 2020.
[2] E. Massad, M. Amaku, A. Wilder-Smith, P. C. Costa dos Santos, C. J.
Struchiner, and F. A. B. Coutinho. Two complementary model-based meth-
ods for calculating the risk of international spreading of a novel virus from
the outbreak epicentre. the case of covid-19. Epidemiology and Infection,
148:e109, 2020.
[3] B. Luque, F. Ballesteros, and O. Miramontes. Cómo modelizar una pan-
demia. Investigación y Ciencia, pages 4857, May 2020.
[4] K. Shah, T. Abdeljawad, I. Mahariq, and F. Jarad.
Qualitative analy-
sis of a mathematical model in the time of COVID-19. BioMed Research
International, 2020:111, 2020.
[5] O. N. Bjørnstad, K. Shea, M. Krzywinski, and N. Altman. The SEIRS
model for infectious disease dynamics. Nature Methods, 17(6), 2020.
[6] A. Kucharski, T. W. Russell, Diamond C., et al. Early dynamics of trans-
mission and control of COVID-19: a mathematical modelling study. The
Lancet Infectious Diseases, 20(5):553558, 2020.
[7] H. Tian, Y. Liu, Y. Li, et al.
An investigation of transmission control
measures during the rst 50 days of the COVID-19 epidemic in China.
Science, 368:eabb6105, 03 2020.
12
[8] J. Bayham, E. P. Fenichel, et al. Impact of school closures for COVID-19
on the us health-care workforce and net mortality: a modelling study. The
Lancet Public Health, 5(5):e271e278, 2020.
[9] R. C. C. Dantas, P. A. de Campos, I. Rossi, and R. M. Ribas. Implications
of social distancing in brazil in the COVID-19 pandemic. Infection Control
&amp; Hospital Epidemiology, pages 12, 2020.
[10] D. K. Chu, E. A. Akl, S. Duda, et al. Physical distancing, face masks, and
eye protection to prevent person-to-person transmission of SARS-CoV-2
and COVID-19: a systematic review and meta-analysis. The Lancet, 2020.
[11] O. N. Bjørnstad, K. Shea, M. Krzywinski, and N. Altman. Modeling infec-
tious epidemics. Nature Methods, 17(5), 2020.
[12] A. Al-Mandhari, D. Samhouri, A. Abubakar, and R. Brennan.
Coron-
avirus disease 2019 outbreak: preparedness and readiness of countries in
the eastern mediterranean region. Eastern Mediterranean Health Journal,
26:136137, 02 2020.
[13] T. Roberton, E. D. Carter, V. B. Chou, et al. Early estimates of the indirect
eects of the COVID-19 pandemic on maternal and child mortality in low-
income and middle-income countries: a modelling study. The Lancet, 2020.
Early view.
[14] T. Burki. COVID-19 in Latin America. The Lancet Infectious Diseases,
20(5):547548, 2020.
[15] J. J. Llibre-Guerra, I. Z. Jiménez-Velázquez, J. J. Llibre-Rodriguez, and
D. Acosta.
The impact of COVID-19 on mental health in the hispanic
caribbean region. International Psychogeriatrics, pages 14, 2020.
[16] G. Reyes Terán. La actual emergencia puso en evidencia el desastre que
impera en el sistema de salud: Aora el abandono de décadas en el sector
salud. La Jornada, page 3, 6 Abril 2020.
[17] Hernández-Vásquez A., Azañedo D., Vargas-Fernández R., and Bendezu-
Quispe G. Association of comorbidities with pneumonia and death among
covid-19 patients in mexico: A nationwide cross-sectional study. J Prev
Med Public Health, 53(4):211219, 2020.
[18] S. Mangiarotti, M. Peyre, Y. Zhang, M. Huc, F. Roger, and Y. Kerr. Chaos
theory applied to the outbreak of covid-19: an ancillary approach to de-
cision making in pandemic context. Epidemiology and Infection, 148:e95,
2020.
[19] J. Jia, X. Lu, Y. Yuan, G. Xu, J. Jia, and N. Christakis. Population ow
drives spatio-temporal distribution of COVID-19 in China. Nature, pages
111, 04 2020.
13
[20] J. Zhang, M. Litvinova, W. Wang, et al.
Evolving epidemiology and
transmission dynamics of coronavirus disease 2019 outside Hubei province,
China: a descriptive and modelling study. The Lancet Infectious Diseases,
Apr 2020. Early view.
[21] T. K. Tsang, P. Wu, E. H. Y. Lau, et al. Eect of changing case denitions
for COVID-19 on the epidemic curve and transmission parameters in main-
land china: a modelling study. The Lancet Public Health, 5(5):e289e296,
2020.
[22] Secretaría
de
Salud.
COVID-19
México.
https://coronavirus.gob.mx/datos/, 2020.
[23] World Health Organization. Global -> mexico, 2020.
[24] O. Miramontes. Entendamos el COVID-19 en México, 2020.
[25] D. A. Armstrong and J. Lucas. Measuring and comparing municipal policy
responses to COVID-19. Canadian Journal of Political Science, pages 112,
2020.
[26] V. Abazi. Truth distancing? whistleblowing as remedy to censorship during
COVID-19. European Journal of Risk Regulation, 11(2):375381, 2020.
[27] R. Ramos-Quiroga, G. González-Farias, and I. D. Rodriguez-Gonzalez. Es-
timaciones del modelo gompertz para los estados y zonas metropolitanas
de méxico, June 2020.
[28] CDMX epidemic group. Modelo epidemiológico del gobierno de la ciudad
de méxico, 2020.
[29] M. A. Capistran, A. Capella, and J. A. Christen.
Forecasting hospital
demand during COVID-19 pandemic outbreaks, 2020.
[30] Secretaría de Salud. Conferencias de prensa diarias, 2020.
[31] J. Bollon, M. Paganini, C. R. Nava, N. De Vita, R. Vaschetto, L. Ragazzoni,
F. Della Corte, and F. Barone-Adesi. Predicted eects of stopping COVID-
19 lockdown on italian hospital demand.
Disaster Medicine and Public
Health Preparedness, pages 15, 2020.
14
