The response to the current COVID-19 pandemics require reflections on the 
validity of scientific knowledge. While non-pharmacological measures for disease 
control are providing a worldwide natural experiment, it is highly advised to submit 
research findings to the scrutinity of renowed epistemologic theories. One should 
also consider the loosening of methodological criticism in time when diffusion of 
results is urgently required. Though criticism is perhaps most precious principle 
of scientific thinking and practice, scientists must find a way into relative 
consensus that can be translated into public health policies. 

In the year 2,000, South Africa President Thado Mbeki was the spokesman of an 
organized movement of AIDS denialism, which still echoes in many countries, 
such as Russia.1 When facing pandemics, scientific denialism may adopt several 
faces and disguises. The “common cold” argument against potential severity of 
COVID-19 spreads through social media. The balance of social/economic versus 
sanitary achievements of lockdown may be contaminated by global ideological 
discussions and/or local political interests.2 Public health challenges become 
more intense when decisions depend on mathematical modeling and scarce, 
suboptimal empirical evidence. Therefore, the epistemological basis of modern 
public health must be discussed. In the following paragraphs, we submit the 
scientific basis of the response to the pandemic to critical scrutinity based on 
ideas from renowed philosophers of science. Additionally, we will discuss the 
policy of disseminating knowledge in times of global emergency. 

“Unlike (…) doctors, the scientist need not choose problems because they 
urgently need solution”, stated Thomas Kuhn (1922-1996) is his masterpiece The 
Structure of Scientific Revolutions.3 Kuhn was too young to have experienced 
1918 influenza pandemics, but he did live the first decade of AIDS emergence. 
His statement that sciences develop inside or around a historically-determined 
paradigm was highly praised by sociologists, anthropologists  and influenced 
(non-orthodoxically, we must clarify) eminent epidemiologists.4 Different 
paradigms are incommensurable, an adjective by which Kuhn means that when 
scientist sees the world from different perspectives their contradictions just 
cannot be solved by discussion or experiment. Well, we must ask if the germ 
theory is one of those Kuhnian paradigms. If we put on Kuhn’s glasses, then all 
the science raised in the pandemic response has a historical, but not 
epistemological, justification. 

Karl Popper (1902-1994) dedicated all his life to explore what the called “the two 
fundamental problems in the theory of knowledge”, which are: (i) the problem of 
induction, as described by David Hume (1711-1776), which states that no matter 
how many observations (which we can translate to scientific evidence) of “A” 
followed by “B”, a causal association would always be a psychological rather than 
a logical conclusion; (ii) the problem of demarcation, that is, the need for a clear 
rule or boundary between what is scientific and what is not.5 Agreeing with Hume, 
Popper refused induction (the cornerstone of “evidence-based medice”) and 
proposed that scientists should be creative in imagining theories, then rigorous in 
testing them both rationally and empirically. Any theory will survive as the fittest 
while it resists empirically-based refutations. Coherently, science is defined for its 
possibility of empiric falsification. How does this apply to scientist fighting COVID-
19? From a Popperian perspective, public response would be strengthened by a 
network of mutually critical researchers. While theoretical discussion and criticism 
cannot be paralyzing or go on too slow while we count the dead people, the 
scientific community may be prepared to endorse changes in public policies 
whenever a theory is refuted and studies point to novel, more adequate 
strategies. 

Of greater concern is Paul Feyrabend’s (1924-1994) “anything goes” statement 
in his famous book “Against Method”6, or his criticism on modern medicine 
achievements in his latter works.7 In a similar direction, New York University 
Philosopher Peter Unger’s (born 1942) skeptical argument that “nothing can ever 
be really known” is in the best hypothesis useless, in the worst scenario highly 
dangerous if spread all over public opinion.8 

Finally, an interesting way out of the epistemological puzzle is provided by Imre 
Lakatos’s (1922-1974) insights on “Programs of Scientific Investigation”.9 
Lakatos attempted to reconcile Popper’s and Kuhn’s ideas, and had a productive 
dialogue with Feyerabend. Briefly, Lakatos imagined networks of mutual criticism 
(like Popper) in permanent rivalry. Occasionally, one of those programs gains 
advantage (becomes “progressive”) over others (which become “regressive”). He 
admits (like Kuhn) some historicity in the balance between them. Still he fiercely 
stands for a demarcation criterion for science. We must therefore assume that 
virological-epidemiological programs are progressive, and should not only be 
heard by government officials, but must be given more expression in scientific 
journals. 

This brings us to the final discussion. Peer-review has provided the basis for 
continuous Popperian-Lakatosian criticism, and at least in theory it provides a 
scientific quality badge to information. Both peer review and editing processes 
take time, which we do not have in the current pandemics. Hundred of studies 
are either published in pre-print repositories or submitted to fast-track peer-
review.10 This obviously means loosening of the critical parameters, a choice of 
speed over rigor. That is totally in accordance with Lakato’s predicted privileges 
for progressive programs. However, this requires a permanent critical attitude 
from the readers, and a constant state of alert in the scientific community. 

In conclusion, the response to COVID-19 does not require consensus. Criticism 
is perhaps the most precious principle of scientific thinking and practice. By 
submitting the role of science in responding to COVID-19 to the scrutiny of 
leading critics of mainstream science, we not only vaccinate our community 
against nihilistic arguments, but also reinforce the human value of research 
activity. Research and scientific criticism must be exercised aiming to collaborate 
with public policies and avoiding messages of uncertainty and insecurity to the 
already sufficiently frightened population. Furthermore, even if we argue that 
there is no such thing as value-neutral science,11 we need to move our research 
away from political and corporate interests. Thus, in an era of extremism, science 
can rise as the pillar of democracy and as a movement to protect life. 
