The aim was to analyze the understanding of health and its relation with physical 
education from the perspective of teachers and managers of a public school of the state 
of São Paulo. It is a descriptive research, with a qualitative approach. Eleven teachers 
two coordinators were volunteers. Data were produced using semi-structured interviews 
and data analysis by non-aprioristic categories. Health was understood, mainly, based 
on the perspective of well-being, as well as the realization of body practices as a link 
between physical education and health in the school context. Thus, physical education 
has a promising path to meet the critical pedagogies regarding the approach to health, 
especially in the confrontation with the active lifestyle. 

Bracht (2013) and Rufino and Darido (2013) indicate that Physical Education 
(PE) has always approached health. Until the 1980s, PE has aimed to fitness and 
movement, using gymnastic methods and sport, acting on the health of students in an 
instrumental perspective (PAIVA et al., 2017). In our study, we conceived it as a 
traditional PE model. 

This perspective has made PE an instrument to achieve health or avoid 
diseases, based on a discourse of an “active body,” which was, and still is, widely 
disseminated. In this line, PE shows to be aligned with the understanding of health 
defined by the World Health Organization (WHO), which is conceived as complete 
physical, mental and social well-being. Thus, the biophysical situation of people is 
prioritized, which we conceive as a restricted conception of health. 

Based on this perspective, Bracht (2013) analyzes that PE is considered an arm 
of the medical institution, acting by means of physical exercises. For Rigo, Pardo and 
Silveira (2007) this understanding eventually divided society and schools among 
healthy and sick individuals, more and less skilled, potentiating the exclusion of 
students. This perspective of PE suffered alterations and changes due to the expansion 
of knowledge of human and social sciences, especially those that address health, 
because its restricted conception proved to lack complementation, considering the 
factors that affected it (PAIVA et al., 2017). 

To this end, the adoption of an expanded concept of health, present in the 
Brazilian scenario due to the VIII National Health Conference (BRASIL, 1986), 
brought new perspectives. Based on this concept, health began to be considered as a 
result of people’s living conditions, with food, housing, income, environment, work, 
transportation, employment, leisure, freedom, access and ownership of land and access 
to health services as determinants. In Palma, Estevão and Bagrichevsky’s (2003) 
understanding, it is an individual’s experimentation in his relationship with society.  

This conception was incorporated by the National Curriculum Parameters 
(PCN) (BRASIL, 1998; 2000) and, recently, by the National Common Curriculum Base 
(BNCC) (BRASIL, 2017). A relevant issue in these and other documents is that health 
should be the object of work of all school agents. However, when normative proposals 
are analyzed based on collective health (WESTPHAL, 2013), they show that they are 
still in a behavioral line, which, aligned with the natural sciences, excels in the adoption 
of healthy lifestyles. 

Regarding PE, Devide (2002, p.78) states that it has a role to play because “[...] 
if we want our intervention to be successful, we teachers must offer what will certainly 
improve the quality of our recipients’ lives.” For Gouvêa and Silva (2019), PE cannot 
be limited to encouraging the practice of physical activities; it should also critically and 
reflexively approach issues of access to leisure equipment and basic health care, 
dialoguing with the benefits of these habits. 

Oliveira, Martins and Bracht (2015a) emphasizes that, by using the discourse 
of physical activity as a means for an active or healthy life, besides contributing to the 
reinforcement of the conception that the systematization of body movement is a means 
for a given purpose, it serves as a market reinforcement of health, directly or indirectly. 
In the same line, there is a demand in contemporary society that directs the focus to 
create a consumer relationship. In this sense, Westphal (2013) draws attention to the 
issue of induction existing in society, because the media ends up stimulating free choice 
based on market logic, eventually imposing healthy lifestyles. 

However, for Oliveira, Martins and Bracht (2015a), the development of the 
expanded conception of health faces some problems within a school unit, such as the 
resistance of the teaching staff to adhere to new practices. According to the authors, 
when we launch a pedagogical look at health promotion, it becomes the responsibility 
and duty of all the actors of the school, especially teachers and the school community.  

By directing a look at health actions, both Oliveira, Martins and Bracht (2015a) 
and Lopes, Nogueira and Rocha (2018), verified the need for training actions and 
specific training of school agents to work with this theme. According to Bagnara and 
Fensterseifer (2019), PE teachers end up inserting themselves in teaching without 
knowing the intentions of the curricular component, thus showing the relevance of 
conducting studies on the theme, allowing the propagation and dissemination of an 
expanded view of health. 

Our study aimed to analyze the understanding of health and its relation with PE 
from the perspective of teachers and managers of a public school of the State Education 
System of the state of São Paulo (REESP). 

This manuscript is part of the results of the Masters’ Thesis defended in 2020, 
which also aimed to understand the approach to health in PE classes. However, due to 
the limits imposed by an article, we adapted the text to a smaller scope.  

This is a descriptive research, which, according, to Thomas, Nelson and 
Silverman (2012, p.293), is “[...] a study of status.” It adopts the qualitative approach 
described by Minayo (1994), which tackles specific questions and is concerned about a 
level of reality that cannot be quantified. 

This study was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of Unifesp (CAAE 
n. 97895018.0.0000.5505) and all subjects signed an informed consent form.  

The research had the participation of 13 volunteers, observing the following 
inclusion criteria: being a full-time professional of the REESP for at least one year and 
working in the school unit surveyed for at least one year. The participant that provided 
insufficient data for data analysis would be excluded, which did not occur. To collect 
multiple perspectives on the research theme, at least one teacher from each area of 
knowledge was sought, as well as the PE teacher and school manager. 

The choose of volunteers was mediated by the pedagogical coordinator during 
the collective pedagogical planning. The professionals were approached individually to 
not compromise the school activities. The school unit chosen is located in the 
municipality of Santos/SP, where middle school (6th to 9th year) was available. 
According to the last Basic Education Census, elementary and middle school in Brazil 
covers 62.6% of registered teachers and the public System is the most comprehensive, 
approximately 77% of Brazilian schools (BRASIL, 2020).  

For data collection, the semi-structured interview was performed, which is one 
of the main ways for data collection for Triviños (2008), valuing the presence of the 
researcher and allowing the participant the freedom to expose their ideas, thus making 
the research richer in detail. The interview script was based on understanding the 
definition of health and its relation with PE. Data were collected between March and 
May 2019, and the school unit was visited 10 times during this period. The interviews 
were conducted in a reserved and private place in the school: management rooms, 
pedagogical coordination and/or the teachers’ room, being present only the researcher 
and the teacher. With the consent of the teachers, the interviews were recorded and later 
transcribed to an electronic file for analysis.  

Data analysis was based on content analysis of the interviewees’ statements, 
considering the phases described in Campos (2004, p.614): pre-exploration, which 
consists of apprehending the important aspects of the material through exhaustive 
reading; selection of units of analysis through clippings of sentences and/or 
transcription of paragraphs related to the objective of the study, and; categorization, 
which are “[...] large statements that cover a variable number of themes [...] that meet 
the objectives of the study [...]”. We used the non-aprioristic categorization, which is 
formed based on the contact of the researchers with the analyzed material. 

Chart 1 shows the profile of the teachers interviewed. With the exception of 
one teacher (Pedro), all others can be considered experienced in the REESP and the 
school unit.  

Maldonado and Silva (2018), in analysis of REESP curricula regarding PE, 
affirm the existence of different perspectives: in 1978, the approach was centered on 
fitness and the development of motor skills; in 1991 the approach was psychomotor 
with links to a critical discussion influenced by the human sciences; in 1996 the 
psychomotor approach remains, but now with contributions from the developmental 
line; in 2008 it was focused on the critical approaches of PE, specifically the critic-
overcoming and critic-emancipatory approaches. By observing Chart 1, we can 
understand that 12 of the 13 teachers experienced at least two phases of the PE 
curriculum at REESP. That is, data on the understanding of health and its relation with 
PE are immersed in meanings derived from a transition of approaches, from 
instrumental to critical. 

In addition, Umemura and Rosa (2020, p.81) emphasize that “[...] teachers 
have been treated as executors and managers as supervisors of policies established by 
the central bodies of public administration.” These characteristics had already been 
related by Fernandes (2012), who found the realization of the dissemination of 
government proposals and elaboration of projects in a bibliographic survey of the 
activities performed by coordinating teachers, besides being responsible for the levels of 
performance in external evaluations.  

Considering the aforementioned information and allied to the conception of 
school as a sociocultural space (DAYRELL, 1996), in which there are several 
perspectives of education and life, and of a space of sociability, which, from the 
perspective of Gusmão (2003), is configured as a space of encounters and mismatches, 
searches and losses, discoveries and cover-ups, we believe that our findings are 
configured in the emergence of the diversity of perceptions on PE within the school. 

When we questioned the volunteers about their understanding of health, we 
obtained unanimous discourses regarding the importance of the theme. However, not all 
answered directly the question, using daily examples to comply with the imposed 
agenda. 

This set of responses allowed us to identify five categories of analysis: 

1. Well-being (Clara, Fabiana, Marta, Marcos, Roberto, Larissa, and 
Juliana); 

2. Absence of diseases (Nara, Daniela, Marcos, and Bruno); 

3. Balance (Sofia, Larissa, and Pedro); 

4. Care of yourself (Sofia and Roberto); 

5. Good habits (Carlos). 

Figure 1 shows that the categories “Well-being” and “Absence of diseases” are 
the most representative, being present in the statements of 10 of the 13 interviewees. 

The category “well-being,” with the largest number of volunteers, refers to 
health in the perspective given by A, which relates health with intellectual, creative and 
social capacities. In this sense, the contributions of teachers seem to transcend the 
restricted perception of health, not limiting it to the biological condition, since health 
becomes the result of the interaction of the individual with the social environment. 

This understanding is also in the BNCC, when it states that the student should 
“take advantage of body practices autonomously to enhance involvement in leisure 
contexts, expand sociability networks and health promotion” (BRASIL, 2017, p.223). 
However, it is necessary to take this interpretation from a behavioral perspective 
(lifestyle change) to a socio-environmental conception, which, for Westphal (2013), is 
consolidated in collective strategies of population empowerment, promotion of healthy 
spaces and development of skills, knowledge and attitudes.  

In the category “Absence of diseases,” the understanding of health is strictly 
biological. For Rigo, Pardo and Silveira (2007), this characteristic divides society into 
healthy and sick. This understanding guided a wide production of knowledge, besides 
having contributed to the development of actions that predominated for long years in the 
intervention proposals of school PE and that can still be found (OLIVEIRA; GOMES; 
BRACHT, 2014). 

In the category “Balance,” health is understood as a corporeal manifestation, 
suggesting a Cartesian view of the individual and reinforcing the actions in the body 
itself, corroborating a restricted conception. Silva, Silva and Lüdorf (2015) verified that 
the body, as a subject in PE classes, has not been systematically discussed; only 
occasionally generating topics of discussion, such as health practices and habits. 

Based on Silva, Silva and Lüdorf’s (2015) perspective, body valorization is 
manifested in contemporaneity, mainly due to health and aesthetics, permeated by 
media exposure. In this sense, teacher Larissa’s speech shows that this triad can lead to 
a risky behavior. According to Silva et al. (2017), media influence ends up reflecting on 
individual’s habits and social relationships, which may either positively or negatively 
influence young people. Thus, it is possible to imbue significant traces of an expanded 
conception of health, acting on the behaviors of individuals; these individuals, in turn, 
may have actions that lead some health problems. 

Regarding the category “Self-care,” we noticed a certain concern with the 
establishment of limits and paths by the individual towards health. In this sense, we can 
agree with Bracht (2019), who stated that care itself can have two variables: the first, 
when this practice is tensioned by oppression, in which the individual is convinced to 
exert it; the second variable can occur consciously, in a manifestation of the practice of 
freedom, in which the body becomes an ally for the development of a way of living. 

Finally, in the category “Good habits,” teacher Carlos points out the risk 
behaviors that surround students, suggesting another path by means of physical 
activities. This statement is elucidated by teacher Daniela in her life narrative, showing 
the habits she had and the adoption by her whole family. In this sense, we can correlate 
it with Devide (1996; 2002), regarding the propagation of habits, but we cannot rule out 
other variables that allow it, such as the socioeconomic variables. 

In short, teachers’ and coordinators’ understanding of health varied from a 
broad to a more restricted perspective, showing that the theme is subject to several 
appropriations. In a broad perspective, the understanding of health considers social 
determinants and has scope beyond a disease itself. In the restricted perspective, in turn, 
health is limited to the physical dimension or to the fact that they are not sick or need 
medicines, as well as to the WHO concept of complete physical, psychological and 
social well-being. 

When we approached the relation between PE and health, we obtained the 
following answers: <>

Based on the statements, we identify five categories: 

1. Body practices (Sofia, Nara, Daniela, Carlos, Fabiana, Marta, Marcos, 
Roberto, Juliana, Bruna, and Pedro); 

2. Body (Daniela, Fabiana, Marta, and Larissa); 

3. Environment (Daniela); 

4. Mental Health (Larissa); 

5. Health (Clara). 

Figure 2 shows unanimity, when considering “body” and “body practices” as 
links between physical education and health, being present in the speech of 12 of the 13 
interviewees. 

In the category “Body practices,” the influence of a traditional PE is clear. This 
category suggests that health is achieved by means of a pedagogical practice focused on 
physical exercise, either by systematical or by playful sport activities (with games), as 
previously affirmed by Devide (1996). This discourse, justified by the development of 
biological variables and motor learning, ends up relating, sometimes implicitly, fitness 
to the achievement of a health index. This perspective guided, and still guides, much of 
the pedagogical practices of physical education teachers (BRACHT, 2013; OLIVEIRA; 
MARTINS; BRACHT, 2015a).  

We notice, then, a cause-and-effect relation, in which health is understood as a 
subject exclusive to the physical education subject, whose role is developing an 
intervention that proposes “body moving” for all students, thus aiming at levels. 

However, [...] the adherence to body practices is not restricted to PE 
classes. Thus, building these competencies in the school 
environment does not guarantee a long-term health education 
that leads to regular and adequate health actions (OLIVEIRA; 
GOMES; BRACHT, 2014, p.74). 

Given the current scenario, it is necessary to emphasize that both the PCN – 
cross-sectional health theme (BRASIL, 2000) and the BNCC (BRASIL, 2017), indicate 
that health is clearly understood as an object of knowledge that should be approached 
by the different curricular components and at all levels of basic education, respecting 
the maturation of the student with a proposal of progressive contents.  

Moreover, the statements of the participants of this category show two 
understandings about the theme: one with the perspective of the body culture of 
movement, as stated by Oliveira, Martins and Bracht (2015a), which corroborates the 
coordinator Sofia, covering games, sports and playfulness, and; another understanding 
in a restricted approach to sport, mentioned by Nara, who teaches Portuguese language. 
These and other factors allow us to understand the complexity of the relation between 
physical education and health in the school, which guides traditional pedagogical 
practices or a practice more open to critical pedagogies. 

In a research with nine physical education teachers belonging to the municipal 
school unit with the largest number of students in the city of Fortaleza-CE (Brazil), 
Ferreira, Oliveira and Sampaio (2013) found physical exercise as a relevant element to 
well-being, reinforcing the understanding of causality, in which teachers’ speech shows 
an understanding of physical activity and health acquisition as synonyms.  

In another study, which investigated the concept of health and healthy habits of 
students in Goiás (state of Brazil), Silva et al. (2017, p.808) stated that 

[...] practice of physical activities fulfills its proposed objective 
when performed in favorable environments, with adequate 
physical conditions, healthy coexistence and construction of 
proposals that provide a sense of physical and mental well-
being, ensuring adequate conditions to the individual’s 
development processes.  

In Doña, Jiménez and Gálvez (2014), who raised the official contents of Chile 
proposed for PE, there is an introductory narrative for the search for an PE focused on a 
critical practice, similar to the movements that occurred in Brazil after the 1980s, 
seeking to show and combat social inequalities; however, the researchers concluded that 
teaching could improve the quality of movements as one of the predominant contents 
for the curricular component. We see, then, a tension between the traditional and the 
critical perspective, possibly distancing the role of school physical education from a 
health approach. 

Regarding the category “Body,” we found that this is the mediator of the 
relation of PE and health. The body suggested by the volunteers is a mediator of actions, 
in which knowledge about body functioning allows its mastery, besides enabling the 
achievement of health. Here we also noted a cause-and-effect relation. 

For Ferreira, Oliveira and Sampaio (2013), PE classes should involve the body 
itself not in a sense of training, but overcoming these barriers, meeting health promotion 
as socially determined. In this perspective, the body should not be seen as an 
instrument, but as an individual’s existence itself. 

In the category “Environment,” PE was noticed as responsible for inputting a 
comprehensive conception of health in the students by using common situations of daily 
living as opportunities for intervention. Thus, it shows a PE not restricted to the 
individual, since it seeks to investigate the relation between the individual and the place 
of social insertion. However, Becalli and Gomes’ (2011) study alert to the existence of 
traces of a hygienist view in the discipline. In our study, we could note this view in 
teacher Daniela’s speech, when she mentions hygiene, cleanliness and organization. 

In the category “Mental health,” teacher Larissa sees a relation between PE and 
health based on the development of coexistence, since it is a heterogeneous group. 
Besides being a welcoming perspective of diversity, the teacher refers to the 
contribution of PE as a socializing curricular component, a limit pointed out by Bracht 
et al. (2003). Regarding students’ social realities, also present in the discourse of teacher 
Larissa, students’ exposure to a risky behavior is notorious. Likewise, Zappe and 
Dell’anglio (2016) identified that the negative perception of relation at school and in the 
family, in addition to poor performance, demotivation and dissatisfaction with the 
school, contribute to changes in behavior, as stressful events that may compromise 
students’ mental health. Thus, the teacher emphasizes the heterogeneity of profiles of 
students that attend the school unit, highlighting the group with greater exposure and 
possibility of adhering to a risky behavior. 

Zappe and Dell’Aglio (2016) point to the experimental phase, covering 
inappropriate eating habits and sports practices, antisocial behavior, use of substances 
such as alcohol, cigarettes and drugs, risky sexual behavior, suicidal behavior and 
violence, emphasizing that this scenario may be related to lack of parental support. In 
this sense, schools should be attentive to these situations and be welcoming. 

Thus, actions such as the School Health Program (PSE ) (BRASIL, 2007), in 
addition to allowing pedagogical actions directed to health, according to Oliveira, 
Martins and Bracht (2015b), enable network actions, ensuring a greater scope of 
identification and treatment of risk behaviors. In this sense, Carneiro and Coutinho 
(2015) point to a significant identification and referral of students by the school for 
treatment in a mental health unit, thus demonstrating a concern about students’ mental 
health. This is a promising intersectorial action. 

Finally, in the “Health” category, health itself is seen as content of the school 
and not only of PE classes. Although we may consider it an expanded understanding, 
the examples of coordinator Clara (vaccination and brushing) show preventive actions, 
which are welcome in an intersectorial perspective, being, however, limited to a 
crosscutting theme of curriculum components, especially of PE. 

Thus, we can identify isolated actions, without continuity between health and 
education areas, showing the importance of PSE (BRASIL, 2007). Oliveira, Martins and 
Bracht (2015b) draw attention to the opportunities for the expansion of health 
knowledge and to the challenges of this type of proposal, which requires collaboration 
among agents, thus enabling greater synergy and articulation.  

In short, we agree with Bracht (2013) on a pedagogical work directed to 
listening and creation of bonds that allow the exposure of students to an ideal of 
happiness, being able to elucidate a path based on body practices, so health can be an 
effect of the choices and actions. This characteristic corroborates Carmo Júnior (2011, 
p.365), because “[...] the body and the world form a single structure; however, we can 
only make this communion visible if we articulate the senses and, to do so, we have to 
see the universe from other angles and forms.” Thus, we understand that the student is 
in the school for being subjected to pedagogical actions, and, in these mediations, there 
should be a significant learning, in the case of our study, towards health. 

Teachers and managers of a school unit of the State School System understood 
health by the perspective of well-being, having links with an expanded conception, 
overcoming aspects centered on the natural sciences. However, this understanding 
seems to be still limited to the individual plan of the students. The study also 
demonstrated that the discourse about body practices as a link between physical 
education and health at school is still hegemonic. 

Despite overcoming a strict paradigm of physical fitness, PE is still understood 
as a curricular component of basic education. Concerning health, PE requires efforts to 
meet critical pedagogies. In this sense, we believe that the critical absorption of the 
BNCC by the area, according to the numerous studies that has focused on the theme, 
will eventually envision a PE aligned with the cultural formation of human beings. 
Thus, health can be debated at the collective level based on its determinants and that the 
body culture, in its manifestations around games, gymnastics, sport, dance, fights, as a 
basis of a pedagogical practice in PE committed to social transformation. In short, a 
practice that combats the pressures of the contemporary world, which in the field of PE 
lives of the precept “Physical activity is health.”  

However, for such purpose, health cannot be thought isolated neither by the 
physical education subject nor by the school. It is a complex work that needs 
articulation with all actors of the community: mothers/fathers/guardians, neighborhood 
leaders, local health units, social assistance, among others.  

In this perspective, it is appropriate and coherent to approach one of Paulo 
Freire’s lessons: educators need to remain patiently impatient (CECCIM, 2007). In our 
study, it remains in the perspective of prompt opposition regarding the active lifestyle 
towards self-care. It may contain a powerful relation between PE and health. 
