Currently doctors and health professionals are facing a challenging pandemic caused by a new strain called 2019 Novel 
Coronavirus (COVID-19). Human infection with COVID-19 does not yet have the clinical spectrum fully described, and 
the pattern of lethality, mortality, infectivity and transmissibility is not known with precision. There is no specific vaccine 
or medication available. Treatment is supportive and nonspecific. In Brazil, as in the rest of the world, the number of 
COVID-19 cases has grown alarmingly, leading to an increase in the number of hospitalizations as well as in mortality 
from the disease. Currently, the states with the highest number of cases are, respectively, São Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, 
Distrito Federal and Ceará. The objective of this work is to offer alternatives in order to guide surgeons regarding the 
surgical management of the airways in patients with suspicion and / or confirmation for COVID-19 infection.

Doctors and healthcare professionals are 
currently facing a challenging pandemic caused 
by a new strain called 2019 Novel Coronavirus 
(COVID-19). Human infection by COVID-19 does 
yet not have the clinical spectrum fully described, 
and the pattern of lethality, mortality, infectivity 
and transmissibility is not precisely known. There 
is no specific vaccine or medication available. 
Treatment is supportive and nonspecific. The 
numbers of COVID-19 cases all over the world have 
grown alarmingly, resulting in increased number of 
hospitalizations, and mortality1,2.

Health professionals who work in the 
emergency room or with acute care patients need to 
adapt their procedures in order to reduce potential 
contamination and the spread of the disease. As of 
early March, China has reported more than 3,300 
infected health workers and at least 22 deaths3,4. To 
follow protective guidelines for invasive procedures 
is essential at this time for emergency professionals 
and surgeons.

Considering that the establishment of a 
definitive airway is directly related to the generation 
of aerosol in an inevitable way, especially when using 
high-speed flow, we must be aware of  the required 
safety measures in order to minimize the risks of 
spreading the disease. Positive pressure ventilation 
during non-invasive ventilation (NIV) or when using 
a face mask or supraglottic devices are considered 
to be high risk factors for aerosol generation, since 
these procedures do not offer adequate sealing, 
which is inferior when compared to a definitive 
airway with an inflated cuff inside the trachea.

Laryngoscopy, tracheal intubation and 
bronchoscopy will promote aerosol production only 
if there is a cough stimulus or if other procedures 
that can generate aerosol are performed (e.g. 
aspiration). Many of these events that can precipitate 
aerosol production can be prevented by adequate 
neuromuscular block and avoiding simultaneously 
different procedures.

The objective of this paper is to offer 
guidelines in order to guide surgeons regarding 
the surgical management of the airways in patients 
suspected and/or confirmed for infection by 
COVID-19.

All patients admitted to the emergency 
departments should be considered carriers of 
COVID-19, until proven otherwise, under the 
current pandemic. Furthermore, patients with any 
respiratory symptoms should be treated as infected 
until an appropriate confirmation diagnosis is 
provided,  since there is no rapid test for this 
situation so far5.

Airway management in general must be 
SAF: Safe, Accurate and Fast. Safe for professionals 
and patients; accurate and precise avoiding 
unreliable, unknown or repeated techniques; fast 
avoiding delays not only for the indication but also 
for the procedure6. Figure 1.

Alternatives to airway obstruction5

•	
Tracheal intubation (TI) should always 
be the first route of choice, avoiding the 
surgical airway in an untimely manner, 
so always try to follow the guidelines 
for handling a difficult airway;

•	
Avoid using high flow oxygen;

•	
The physician who will perform the 
airway management should preferably 
be experienced to maximize the 
success of the first TI attempt;

•	
In case of suspect difficult airway, it is 
recommended to have the concurrent 
aid of a professional with experience in 
surgical airways;

•	
Minimize the number of people at the 
bedside. There is a recommendation 
for 3 professionals: the doctor, an 
assistant (eg nurse) and a medication 
/ monitoring administrator (eg nurse 
technician)6.

Surgical cricothyroidotomy, when needed,  
is preferable to needle cricothyroidotomy because it 
is more effective and reduces the spread of aerosols. 
The puncture technique is reserved for exceptional 
cases under emergency scenarios.

An attempt is made to identify and palpate 
the cricothyroid membrane, with two potential 
scenarios5, as depicted in table 1. 

The maximum time that a patient can be 
kept on TI, without the risk of tracheal injury, is 
controversial, but several studies have proven the 
benefit of doing an early  TQT, which, according to 
different definitions, can be performed within 2, 7 or 
10 days of mechanical ventilation8.

Considering that a tracheostomy is an 
elective procedure, prior diagnostic confirmation of 
COVID-19 and the patient’s clinical stabilization are 
recommended, as this is a high-risk procedure due 
to the ability to generate aerosols5.

The precise indication and the correct 
assessment for the indication of the procedure 
must be considered in order to avoid unnecessary 
risks of spreading the disease.

If the test is negative for COVID-19, it is 
recommended to perform the standard operating 
procedure (liquid-resistant surgical mask, surgical 
gown, gloves and eye protection).

Standard operative procedure for tracheostomy in 
a COVID-19 positive patient / unknown status5

•	
Specialists who will perform anesthesia 
and the surgical procedure  must 
ensure that it is safe, accurate and fast 
(SAF).

•	
Reduce team members to just the 
essential required professionals.

•	
Preparation and attire:

1.	 Use the FFP3 / N95 mask;

2.	 Use eye / face protection whenever 
performing TCT or changing a TCT 
tube due to the risk of respiratory 
secretions or body fluids. One of the 
following options is suitable:

a.	 surgical mask with integrated visor;

b.	 full face shield / visor.

3.	 Wear 
disposable 
gowns 
resistant 
to liquids / fluids (waterproof). If 
a permeable gown is used, use a 
disposable plastic gown underneath. 
The gown must be sterilized, with long 
sleeves, mesh or elastic cuff and a rear 
opening. In addition, it must be made 
of good quality, non-allergenic and 
resistant material. It must provide an 
effective antimicrobial barrier, allow 
the performance of activities under a 
comfortable feeling,   and be available 
in various sizes9.

4.	 Gloves must be comfortable to allow 
precise movements. Consider using 
“two gloves”. In some countries there 
is the availability of gloves with a biogel 
content that externalizes and signals a 
perforation.

•	
Use a conventional tracheostome, 
avoiding the fenestrated models;

•	
Every effort should be made not to 
damage the cuff of the endotracheal 
tube when performing TCT;

•	
Perform an initial advance of the 
endotracheal tube before the TCT 
window is performed to reduce aerosol 
elimination;

•	
If possible, stop ventilation while the 
tracheal incision is being performed, 
and check that the cuff is already 
inflated before restarting ventilation;

•	
Ventilation should be  stopped before 
the insertion of the tracheostome,  and 
perform a fast and accurate placement 
of the tracheostome with immediate 
inflation of the cuff;

•	
Confirm the adequate placement, 
preferentially, with capnography, if 
available;

•	
Check that there are no leaks and that 
the tracheostome is well fixed;

•	
An HME type filter (Heat and moisture 
exchanger) must be placed on the 
tracheostome to reduce the exposure 
of the virus, in case of disconnection.
A suggested alternative, either in elective 
and/or emergency procedures is to use an extension, 
obstructed by the plunger of a syringe,  and then 
immediately use forceps for obstruction, followed 
by the removal of the plunger and connection to 
the mechanical ventilation system (figure 2).

Post-tracheostomy care

•	
The Royal College of Anaesthetists 
suggests avoiding humidified circuits, 
as it will theoretically reduce the risk of 
contamination of the room if there is 
an unexpected disconnection from the 
circuit;

•	
Avoid changing the tracheostome until 
the patient has a COVID-19 negative 
test;

•	
Check the inflated cuff for leaks

•	
Make every effort not to disconnect 
the circuit;

•	
Only closed-circuit suction should be 
used.

Personal protective equipment (PPE) is only 
part of a system to prevent healthcare professionals’ 
contamination. In addition to the protective 
equipment, procedures such as decontamination of 
surfaces and equipments, minimizing unnecessary 
contact with the patient and surfaces, as well as 
careful waste management are essential to reduce 
risks5.

The virus can remain viable in the air for 
a prolonged period and on non-absorbent surfaces 
for many hours and even days10.  However, clearance 
of infectious particles after an aerosol generating 
procedure are dependent on the mechanical/natural 
ventilation and air change per hour in the room. A 
single air change is estimated to remove 63% of 
airborne contaminants. Based on this, the minimum 
time considered for cleaning the environment after 
aerosol release is 20 minutes6,11.

Airway procedures are, currently,  classified 
according to their risk as follows (expressed in 
decreasing order)10:

- Tracheal intubation

- Tracheostomy / Cricothyroidotomy

- Noninvasive ventilation (NIV)

- Ventilation mask

On the opposite side of social isolation, 
health professionals are at the forefront of the battle 
against COVID-19, with greater risks of infection. 
Personal protective equipment must be prioritized, 
and must be associated with procedures adapted to 
offer adequate care, including surgery, in order to 
reduce the risks of infection. Procedures with exposure 
to the patient’s aerosols, such as cricothyroidotomy 
and tracheostomy, must be adapted,  and require the 
appropriate education of emergency physicians and 
surgeons. Health professionals are the most valuable 
resources at the moment.
