A new Coronavirus (2019-nCov, renamed SARS-CoV-2) was identified in the Chinese 
city of Wuhan in late 2019, and was declared a pandemic by the World Health 
Organization, on March 11, 2020. As it is a highly infectious disease, major regional 
and national changes have been made, social isolation was recommended, which led 
to the interruption of various services, including elective dental treatments. This review 
aimed to identify the changes that occurred in the post-COVID-19 orthodontic practice 
scenario. For such, a search was made for articles published in the bibliographic bases 
PubMed, Scopus and SciELO, using the keywords “Orthodontics” and “Covid-19”. 
From the eligibility criteria, 11 articles were selected for analysis. It was found that 
social isolation impacted the scheduling of orthodontic appointments and patient’s 
anxiety about the duration of treatments. The use of teleodontology proved to be an 
ally in screening and in patient care. Preventive infection control must be adopted for 
safe orthodontic practice. 

Due to the identification of a high number of cases involving a new Coronavirus 
in the Chinese city of Wuhan [1] (2019-nCov, renamed SARS-CoV-2) [2,3], the World 
Health Organization (WHO) declared a pandemic on March 11, 2020 [4]. In an attempt 
to contain the spread of the highly contagious COVID-19, major regional and national 
changes have been made, leaving only essential services open [5].  

It was recommended to suspend elective dental treatments except for 
emergencies, to help in social isolation measures, reduce the consumption of 
individual protective equipment (IPE), reduce aerosol production and the consequent 
risk of infection [6]. 

With the postponement of orthodontic consultations, the concern with the 
prolongation of the treatment arose among patients [7], as well as anxiety about 
scheduling the next visit to the orthodontist [8], as social isolation became a regulation 
adopted by several countries [9]. 

Without the possibility of face-to-face consultations, professionals and patients 
undergoing orthodontic treatment had the opportunity to use technology to offer and 
receive virtual assistance, using photo, video or video-call applications, thus allowing 
the orthodontist to evaluate the need to be seen at the office [5,6]. These technological 
communication tools, aside from keeping the patient-professional relationship active, 
decrease anxiety, since there is no risk of contamination, contrary to what happens 
during face-to-face care [8]. 

In order for a full return to orthodontic practice to happen, effective infection 
control measures must be routinely adopted by all the dental team members, such as 
the correct washing of hands, disinfection of all surfaces in the dental office, and the 
complete understanding and acceptance of protocols recommended by WHO [7].  

Considering the importance of information about the current situation, this study 
aimed to identify the changes that occurred in the post-COVID-19 orthodontic practice 
scenario. 

Documentary technique based on pre-existing literature on the subject was 
used to carry out this bibliographic review. The research included the search for articles 
published in the bibliographic databases PubMed, Scopus and SciELO. As keywords, 
the terms “Orhodontics” and “Covid-19” were used in both Portuguese and in English. 
Both terminologies were extracted from the Health Sciences Descriptors (DeCS) of the 
Latin American and Caribbean Center on Health Sciences on Health Sciences 
Information (BIREME). 

As eligibility criteria, articles published up to August 2020, written in English and 
Portuguese, which had the full text available within the theme addressed, were 
included. Articles involving the theme of COVID-19 in Dentistry but not the 
Orthodontics specialty, letters to the Editor and those studies carried out on animals 
(in vivo) were excluded. 

Forty-seven articles were found, 38 in the PubMed database, 8 in the Scopus 
database, and 1 in SciELO. Of these, 12 that were duplicated were excluded. The 
remaining 35 articles were read by two independent reviewers, of which 11 were 
selected for analysis according to the inclusion criteria, as can be seen in Figure 1. 

Chart 1 shows the author, the year and country of the study, the objectives, the 
main results, and the conclusions of the 11 selected articles. Data found served as a 
compass for discussing the results of this article. 

There are concerns regarding the appearance, epidemiology, risks and 
precautions during the disease crisis [15] and implications of coronavirus infection for 
orthodontic treatment [5]. Preventive strategies for infection control [12] and aerosol 
reduction [13] have been reported. Additionally, there was the recommendation to use 
virtual assistance [11, 13, 14] and assessments regarding the impact of the pandemic 
on orthodontic consultations and on the anxiety generated in patients and 
professionals [6-9]. 

Due to the pandemic caused by the coronavirus, dental professionals must be 
aware of the occupational risks caused by COVID-19, and stay up to date on infection 
control guidelines. It is the orthodontist’s responsibility to ensure the safety of his/her 
team and prevent cross-contamination within the dental office [5,15]. 

The risk of acquiring COVID-19 can occur by several ways, including droplets 
of saliva from coughing or sneezing, indirect contact with droplets of saliva that have 
stuck to surfaces, aerosols generated during orthodontic procedures [11], during 
removal and replacement aligners, fixed or removable appliances and elastic and 
being in contact with several people and companions, bonding and removal of 
brackets, moldings, oral scanning, photographs, wire changes, and placement of mini 
implants [5]. Orthodontics instruments and materials that are not individually packaged 
can be a source of contamination [12]. As the coronavirus was also identified in the 
saliva of infected individuals [16], this biological fluid represents an additional risk for 
professionals and their relatives. [17]. 

Among the situations that can be considered urgent in Orthodontics, are the 
insertion of a wire from a fixed orthodontic appliance in the gum, oral mucosa leading 
to severe pain and/or infection, circumstances related to dental trauma in patients who 
use fixed or removable appliances, or other conditions in which the lack of care would 
be harmful to the patient, such as gingival inflammation resulting from the loosening of 
an orthodontic band or the detachment of brackets [18]. 

As tools for teleodontology, photos, videos or video calls, communication 
applications such as WhatsApp and Telegram, and websites [10,13] were used. Virtual 
assistance proved to be a good way to provide assistance to patients, with reduced 
costs, greater access to treatment, less risk of infection, less consultations, problem 
solving and more follow-up with odontophobic patients [10,13,14]. Remote monitoring 
is a viable way for some orthodontic care in times of pandemic, and can be considered 
a solution in normal times to facilitate the demands of orthodontic therapy [14]. 

Assessments regarding the impact of the pandemic on the orthodontic 
consultations and on the anxiety generated in patients and professionals were carried 
out through questionnaires. It was observed that the level of anxiety was more related 
to women than to men and that the greatest concern was associated with delayed 
treatment [6-9]. Fixed lingual appliances and invisible aligners were less associated 
with high levels of anxiety about the duration of treatment compared to conventional 
fixed appliances [9]. Professionals, on the other hand, reported fear of returning to their 
daily activities because they considered it a high risk for them and their families [6]. 

As can be seen, procedures related to orthodontic practice must strictly follow 
preventive measures to control the transmission of SARS-CoV-2, reducing the use of 
aerosol to minimize infections and avoid contamination of environments. Treatment 
guidelines can be provided in a remote format at first, and when necessary, treatment 
can be performed if the infection prevention and control protocol is followed. Finally, 
Teleorthodontics is a way of reassuring patients and professionals, and accompanying 
patients without compromising treatment results. 

The need for social isolation imposed by the coronavirus has been shown to 
have an impact on scheduling orthodontic appointments, as well as on patient’s anxiety 
about prolonging their treatments. The use of communication technologies has been 
of great value in patient care, as well as in the initial screening before a face-to-face 
consultation. Strict infection control protocols must be adopted so that orthodontic 
practice is fully performed without offering risks to patients and professionals. 
