Publication status: Preprint has been published in a journal as an article
DOI of the published article: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202238252396
Using the Community of Inquiry framework to analyze emojis
as an emerging language in an online educational experience
via WhatsApp
Jennifer L. Reeves, Glenda A. Gunter, Junia Braga, Marcos Racilan
https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Submitted on: 2021-11-09
Posted on: 2021-11-10 (version 1)
(YYYY-MM-DD)
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
 https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396 
 
 
Using the Community of Inquiry framework to analyze emojis as an emerging language 
in an online educational experience via WhatsApp 
 
Usando o modelo de Comunidade de Conhecimento para analisar emojis como 
linguagem emergente em experiências educacionais via WhatsApp 
 
Jennifer L. Reeves1 
Glenda A. Gunter2 
Junia Braga3 
Marcos Racilan4 
 
Abstract 
With the ever-growing interest in WhatsApp as a social space to accommodate pedagogical 
initiatives, the role of emojis as an emergent Internet language in this social space needs to be 
better understood as mobile technologies have been integrated in education. With that in 
mind, this paper reports a study that employed an embedded correlational mixed methods 
design, and aimed to identify: the emojis used to support cognitive, teaching, and social 
presences in a teacher education course via WhatsApp; participants’ attitudes regarding the 
use of emojis, and their age and gender relation to this use. The data generated from the 
interactions of the teachers via WhatsApp were analyzed and discussed based on Garrison et 
al.’s (1999) Community of Inquiry Model. This conceptual framework identifies crucial 
elements for successful online educational experiences and assumes learning occurs through 
the interaction of three core elements: social, cognitive and teaching presences. The findings 
show that emojis can effectively be used to support teaching, cognitive, and social presences. 
The high frequency of emojis seem to be both culturally situated and gender related. 
Keywords: Community of Inquiry, emoji usage, mobile learning, WhatsApp. 
 
1 Nova Southeastern University, Fort Lauderdale, FL - USA. Orcid: https://orcid.org/0000-
0002-5494-3990. E-mail: jennreev@nova.edu. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
2  University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL - USA. Orcid: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6441-
4814. E-mail: glenda.gunter@ucf.edu. 
3 Federal University of Minas Gerais (UFMG), Belo Horizonte, MG - Brazil. Orcid: 
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8450-2061. E-mail: juniabraga@ufmg.br. 
4 Federal Center for Technological Education of Minas Gerais (CEFET-MG), Belo Horizonte, MG - 
Brazil. Orcid: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0382-2443. E-mail: marcosracilan@cefetmg.br. 
 
Resumo 
Com o interesse crescente pelo uso do WhatsApp como espaço social para iniciativas 
pedagógicas, o papel dos emojis como língua emergente nesse espaço precisa ser melhor 
entendido considerando a integração de tecnologias móveis na educação. Com isso em mente, 
este artigo relata um estudo que empregou uma metodologia mista e visou identificar: os 
emojis usados para apoiar presenças cognitiva, instrucional e social em um curso de formação 
de professores via WhatsApp; as atitudes dos participantes em relação ao uso de emojis e a 
relação de idade e gênero com esse uso. Os dados gerados a partir das interações dos 
professores via WhatsApp foram analisados e discutidos com base no Modelo Comunidade de 
Conhecimento de Garrison et al. (1999). Essa estrutura conceitual identifica elementos 
cruciais para experiências educacionais online de sucesso e assume que a aprendizagem 
ocorre por meio da interação de três elementos centrais: presenças social, cognitiva e 
instrucional. Os resultados mostram que os emojis podem ser usados com eficácia para apoiar 
essas presenças. A alta frequência de emojis parece ser culturalmente situada e relacionada ao 
gênero. 
Palavras-chave: Comunidade de Conhecimento, uso de emoji, aprendizagem móvel, 
WhatsApp. 
 
1. Introduction 
 
The Internet has transformed the way we communicate. The addition of the Web and digital 
technologies has spawned the emergence of a language phenomenon in online 
communication, something genuinely different from other communication modes, which 
includes − ‘speech + writing + electronically mediated properties’ (Crystal, 2004, p. 48). 
Initially different types of language appeared in asynchronous communication, such as 
emoticons (short for emotion icon) to express one’s feelings or mood − :-) for happy, and :-( 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
for sad, today’s technological advances have enabled the creation of emojis, widely used in 
social media and interactions via SMS, Messenger, and mobile applications like WhatsApp, to 
express feelings and other forms of meanings. 
 
The term emoji combines Japanese terms and many feel the resemblance to the English words 
emotion and emoticon is purely coincidental, however, like many words in various languages, 
there may be connections. The first emoticon, the humble smiley :-) was used in 1982 in a 
communication by Dr. Scott Fahlman, a Carnegie Mellon Professor. As we see today the 
emoticon or emoji has become part of our daily communication.  The updated miniature 
images were designed for use on mobile devices to express emotions in text communication. 
Their popularity grew quickly and spread around the world as a form of communication and 
visual cues in the digital culture. Since face-based emojis were created, the library of emojis 
has grown with the introduction of animals, food, and other pictures (Alshenqeeti, 2016). 
 
As Paiva (2016) points out, informal written language is becoming increasingly multimodal. 
For Paiva, who identified and analyzed emojis in social media, the use of emojis can be 
understood as an attempt to convey meaning economically in certain interactions. The 
creation of emojis, associated with mobile applications and their emoji keyboards, has 
transformed the way we communicate and interact onTwitter, WhatsApp, Instagram, 
Facebook, and other social media platforms. There is a growing body of research that is 
focused on interpreting the uses of emojis in all forms of digital communication modes. 
Researchers have found that even though many emoji’s look similar, their meaning and 
interpretation are influenced by individuals' cultural backgrounds, gender differences, and 
their own visual characteristics create a language for communication (Bai, Dan, Mu, & Yang, 
2019). Fullwood, Orchard, and Floyd (2013) conducted extensive research on emoji use in 
Internet chat rooms. They found that all age groups use emoticons for expressing emotions in 
communication. Their research looked at specific use of emoji’s based on gender.  They 
found female participants were more likely to use expressive emoticons more often than male 
participants and overall were more likely to use emoticons during direct interactions with 
others. 
 
Since being introduced to the market in 2009, WhatsApp’s popularity has continued to grow. 
If in its infancy the app was primarily used for communication, it has proved to be a tool that 
can be used to mediate educational experiences. The ubiquitous and mobile nature of the app, 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
coupled with its features for creating and sharing oral, written and multimedia content, 
replying and forwarding posts has piqued the interest of teachers, especially in the language 
context, to integrate this tool into teaching and learning. 
 
With the ever-growing usage of WhatsApp as a social medium to entertain pedagogical 
initiatives, the role of emojis in communication channels needs to be better understood if we 
are to integrate mobile devices and apps in the educational context. This is important because 
emojis can yield insights into both the evolution of learning communities in education and the 
role of non-verbal and multimodal texts in online education experiences via mobile devices. 
 
One of the most influential studies on the quality of online learning was Garrison, Anderson, 
and Archer’s (1999) Community of Inquiry (CoI) Model. Their framework aimed to identify 
key elements for a successful text-based communication in online courses, with the 
assumption that learning occurs through the interaction of three core elements: social 
presence, cognitive presence and teaching presence. Although their study recognized the use 
of emoticons in forum interactions, identifying the role of emerging languages in educational 
experiences via mobile devices may contribute to the discussions regarding online 
communication. Researchers have continued to analyze different forms of communication in 
online learning using the CoI model (Micsky & Foels, 2019; Rath, 2012). 
 
Drawing on the CoI model, the purpose of this embedded correlational study is threefold: a) 
discover what types of emojis are used to support cognitive, teaching, and social presences in 
an 8-week continuing education course on the use of mobile devices and application via 
WhatsApp; b) determine how participants’ attitudes relate to the use of emojis for cognitive, 
teaching, and social presences during this course; and c) determine how participants’ age and 
gender relate to and potentially explain their emoji use. With this purpose in mind, this paper 
presents a brief overview of the Community of Inquiry (CoI) Model. 
 
2. The Community of Inquiry (CoI) 
 
According to Garrison et al. (1999), “Cognitive presence is a vital element in critical thinking, a 
process and outcome that is frequently presented as the ostensible goal of all higher education.” 
(p. 93). This presence can be identified in asynchronous written communication when students 
are exchanging information, connecting ideas, and applying new concepts. According to 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
Garrison et al., cognitive presence is one of the essential elements in the CoI framework that 
are developed through the connections of the participants to construct meaning through 
sustained communication. 
 
Social presence is defined by Garrison et al. (1999) as “the ability of participants in a 
community of inquiry to project themselves socially and emotionally, as ‘real’ people (i.e., 
their full personality), through the medium of communication being used” (p. 94). Emotion 
expressions, risk-free expression, encouraging group cohesion, acknowledging others, and 
encouraging collaboration are some of the indicators of social presence in online text-based 
communication as can be seen in Table 1. 
 
An essential characteristic of creating social presence in face-to-face settings is visual cues 
that individuals express. In online environments, individuals often have never communicated 
in person, which can create challenges in establishing social presence. Kuehn (1993) and 
Walther (1994) described ways participants create a connection through the use of emoticons 
or other symbols to add affective elements in computer-mediated conversations. These 
resources helped establish social presence and added emoticons to the online experience (Bai, 
Dan, Mu, & Yang, 2019). 
 
According to Garrison and Arbaugh (2007), research on the role of student group cohesiveness 
and interaction in team effectiveness suggests a strong relationship between social presence and 
learning outcomes. The authors, based on investigations conducted by Molinari (2010), Celani 
and Collins (2005), and Beuchot and Bullen (2005), also claim that social presence is a 
foundation for cognitive presence (Whiteside, 2015). Findings in recent studies, such as 
d’Alessio et al. (2019) and Rolim et al. (2019), also reveal that social presence has strong links 
with cognitive presence. 
 
Garrison et al. (1999) claim that appropriate cognitive presence and social presence are 
dependent upon the presence of a teacher whose role includes defining and initiating discussion 
topics, building understanding, among other things. Based on peer-facilitation techniques, a 
study by Chen, Lei, and Cheng (2019) revealed that teacher presence may affect the level of 
cognitive presence in online classes. The intervention of peer facilitators during the course, 
especially when asking questions of a specific type, affected the level of cognitive presence. 
For Braga (2007), the facilitation of discussions can also have a distributed character in online 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
educational experiences as course participants may facilitate discussions that involve, for 
example, encouraging discussions, identifying points of convergence and divergence, and 
proposing new ideas, a role generally played by a teacher. 
 
As the model has been well received by scholars and educators to evaluate cognitive, social, 
and teaching presences, and acknowledges different language manifestations such as 
emoticons, it is our understanding that it can be used to analyze the meaning of emojis in 
interactions that occur during online educational experiences via WhatsApp. 
 
3. Method 
 
Participants 
 
The research context was an 8-week continuing education course focusing on the use of 
mobile devices in language learning. This course, part of a project from the School of Letters 
of a prestigious university in Brazil, was offered to K-12 in-service English teachers from 
different parts of the country. Due to the high number of teachers enrolled (N = 227), six 
groups were formed and mediated simultaneously. 
 
Figure 1 shows the locations of the research participants when they took part in the course. 
 
Figure 1 – Location of the Participants 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
 
Note. Created by the authors with pt.batchgeo.com. Retrieved from 
https://pt.batchgeo.com/map/dc97f2471e0e465c02cb799b97cb383b 
 
As can be seen on the map, the highest number of participants are from the South East and the 
North East regions of the country. It is worth mentioning the potential of mobile applications, 
especially WhatsApp, to both reach and gather people from different locations. In a 
continental size country like Brazil, it was possible for people from urban and rural areas to 
participate in the course on mobile learning. 
 
Instrument 
 
All participants were given a 10-question presurvey prior to beginning the course. The 
presurvey consisted of four demographic questions (i.e., name, location, age, gender) and six 
5-point Likert scale questions on participants’ attitudes towards the use of mobile devices for 
teaching and learning. Upon completion of the 8-week course, participants were given a post 
survey consisting of three questions on their readiness to use and apply mobile devices for 
teaching and learning. The pre and post survey questions were selected from the Mobile 
Learning Survey, originally adapted by Gunter and Reeves (2017) to examine teachers’ 
attitudes towards online professional development embedded with mobile learning. Internal 
consistency reliability for the attitude questions were acceptable (r = .70 for presurvey items 
and r = .77 for post survey items (Gunter & Reeves, 2017). 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
 
Design 
 
This study employed an embedded correlational mixed methods design. According to 
Creswell and Plano Clark (2018), an embedded approach is used when both quantitative and 
qualitative data collection and analysis are combined with a traditional quantitative (or 
qualitative) approach. In contrast to most mixed methods designs, the purpose is not 
necessarily to merge the two data sets since they are typically used to answer separate 
research questions. In the current study, the quantitative data collection and analysis was 
embedded in qualitative data collection and analysis. For the qualitative data, transcripts were 
collected from the WhatsApp course and coded based on the CoI framework. Emoji use was 
analyzed qualitatively using Emoji word clouds with rich participant descriptions to support 
the main findings. Participants’ emoji use was then quantified and correlated with 
participants’ attitudes based on pre and post survey responses. Additionally, participants’ age 
was correlated to their emoji use to determine if age influenced emoji use. Finally, emoji use 
was compared for male and female participants to determine if gender had a significant 
impact on participants’ emoji use. The following research questions guided this study: 
 
a) What types of emojis are used to support cognitive, teaching, and social presences in an 8-
week continuing education course on the use of mobile devices and application via 
WhatsApp? 
 
b) How do participants’ attitudes relate to the use of emojis for cognitive, teaching, and social 
presences during this course via WhatsApp? 
 
 
c) How do participants’ age and gender relate to and potentially help explain their emoji use? 
 
Procedures 
 
At the beginning of the course all participants were given the presurvey to measure their 
attitudes towards mobile devices, as well as a demographic questionnaire. The course was 
then carried out over an 8-week period and mediated via WhatsApp. The tasks relied on the 
following pillars: i) familiarization with different mobile apps - WhatsApp functions 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
(location, audio, text message etc.), and recognition of genres circulating in mobile platforms 
- selfies, memes, among others; ii) material development based on the functionalities of 
mobile devices, such as cameras, GPS, among others; and iii) discussions on approaches that 
may be incorporated to m-learning. At the end of the 8 weeks all participants were given the 
post survey to measure their attitudes towards mobile devices. 
 
Data Analysis 
 
Upon completion of the 8-week course, transcripts from each group were downloaded from 
WhatsApp into an Excel spreadsheet. The written interactions were used as contexts in the 
analyses of the emojis to help categorize them as instances of cognitive, teaching, or social 
presence. All emojis used in the interactions in each group were coded, according to the CoI 
categories and indicators as seen in Table 1. When one or more emojis were used as a single 
representation in an interaction (i.e., all by itself) the coding was based on the discussion that 
was taking place the moment it was posted. The coding of the interactions in the six groups 
(Group 1- 1962 posts, Group 2 - 1895 posts, Group 3 - 1180 posts, Group 4 -1436 posts, 
Group 5 -1303 posts, Group 6 - 1492 posts) were then verified by two of the authors of this 
article. 
 
Table 1 – Community of Inquiry Coding Template 
 
Elements 
Categories 
Indicators (examples only) 
Cognitive Presence 
Triggering Event 
Sense of puzzlement 
  
Exploration 
Information exchange 
  
Integration 
Connecting ideas 
  
Resolution 
Apply new ideas 
Social Presence 
Emotional Expression 
Emotions 
  
Open Communication 
Risk-free expression 
  
Group Cohesion 
Encouraging collaboration 
Teaching Presence 
Instructional Management 
Defining and initiating discussion topics 
  
Building Understanding 
Sharing personal meaning 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
  
Direct Instruction 
Focusing discussion 
Note. Retrieved from Garrison et al. (1999, p. 89). 
 
Upon completion of the coding, it was discovered that 117 unique emojis were used by the 
participants during the 8-week course. In order to answer the first research question and 
determine the types of emojis used to support cognitive, social, and teaching presence that 
occurred during the interactions in the course, frequencies were then computed on each emoji 
type. More specifically, within each group, the number of times each type of emoji was used 
(e.g.,    or   ) was counted and summed for each CoI category (e.g., Triggering Event or 
Emotional Expression). Emoji use for each CoI category was then combined to produce a 
total count for each CoI element (or presence type; see Table 1). This was done for each of the 
six groups, and then all six groups were combined to produce the total number. In other 
words, for each unique emoji, tallies were computed within and across the six groups for each 
CoI category. Each CoI category was then grouped into the CoI Element (i.e., cognitive, 
teaching, or social) to give the total number of times the emoji was used for each presence. 
Upon completion, a total of 2,079 emojis were used across the groups to represent cognitive, 
teaching, and social presence during the course. Emoji clouds were created to visually present 
the data. Additionally, rich descriptions from the text (WhatsApp course interactions) were 
included to support how the various emojis were used to support each presence.  
 
In order to answer the second research question, how do participants’ attitudes relate to their 
emoji use, Spearman Rho analyses were conducted on participants’ posttest scores and emoji 
use. Unfortunately, only 61 participants completed both the pretest (including the 
demographic information) and posttest; therefore, the researcher’s only examined the emoji 
use for these 61 participants to answer the second two research questions. To answer the third 
research question, how do age and gender relate to and help explain emoji use, spearman rho 
analyses were conducted on age and emoji use and independent samples t tests were 
conducted with gender as the IV and emoji use as the DV. 
 
4. Results and Discussion 
 
To determine the types of emojis used to support cognitive, teaching, and social presences, 
frequency distributions were conducted on each emoji type across all presences. The results 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
are presented in Appendix A. Overall, the most frequently used emojis across all three 
presences, cognitive, teaching, and social, were the Clapping Hands emoji    (n = 287 
times), the Winking Face emoji    (n = 251 times), Thumbs-Up emoji    (n = 139 times), 
the Face With Tears of Joy emoji    (n = 121 times), the Smiling Face With Smiling Eyes 
emoji    (n = 120 times), the Smiling Face emoji 
 (n = 112 times), the Smiling Face With 
Smiling Eyes and Hearts emoji    (n = 111 times), and the Rolling On The Floor Laughing 
emoji    (n = 41 times; see Appendix A for the frequencies for each type of emoji used by 
participants).  
 
Table 2 presents the original meaning of the most frequently used emojis found in the 
interactions during the continuing education course. The meaning of the emojis that were used 
most frequently in cognitive presence, teaching presence, and social presence were included 
in the table. It is important to note that given the large number of emojis used to express social 
presence, there were other emojis (i.e.,   : n = 77;   : n = 71;    : n = 59,   : n = 58,   : 
n = 56;   : n = 47) that were used more frequently than the Rolling On The Floor Laughing 
emoji   , but did not appear as one of the most frequently used emojis for cognitive, 
teaching, or social presence and therefore was not included in Table 2). 
 
Table 2 – Description of the Most Frequently Used Emojis by Participants 
 
Emoji 
Name and description 
 
Clapping Hands 
Two hands clapping. Expression of hurray, applause, bravo, very well done or being 
in agreement. 
 
Winking Face 
Facial gesture of winking. Expression of humor, approval, appreciation, and 
understanding.  
 
Thumbs-Up 
Hand with thumb turned up. Stands for approval, agreement and commitment. Can 
mean well done or liking. 
 
Face With Tears of Joy 
Big grin, uplifted eyebrows, and smiling eyes shedding tears. Funny, giggling, 
pleasing, or something unbelievably humorous that makes us cry laughing. 
 
Smiling Face With Smiling Eyes 
Shy and embarrassed grin. The red cheeks are expressing joy. Represents happiness 
and positivity.  
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
 
Smiling Face 
Shy grin with eyebrows. Communicates a broad range of warm and positive feelings, 
including satisfaction, gratitude and affection. 
 
Smiling Face With Smiling Eyes and Hearts 
Romantic emoji commonly used to express warm fuzzy feelings or uplifted mood. 
Can also express a feeling of love or being in love.  
 
Rolling On The Floor Laughing 
Smiley face laughing out of control. Something is so funny that we roll on the floor. 
Can represent very interesting and extremely humorous, and entertaining.  
Note. Adapted descriptions by the authors, source https://www.emojimeanings.net/ 
 
Cognitive presence 
 
To determine what type of emojis were used to support cognitive presence, frequency 
distributions were conducted on all interactions. Results illustrated that for cognitive presence, 
the Clapping Hands emoji    was the most frequently used emoji (n = 105 times), followed 
by Smiling Face With Smiling Eyes emoji    (n = 51 times), Thumbs-Up emoji    (n = 47 
times), Smiling Face emoji 
 (n = 47 times), Smiling Face With Smiling Eyes And Three 
Hearts emoji 
 (n = 40 times), Winking Face emoji    (n = 37 times), Face With Tears of 
Joy emoji    (n = 33 times), Slightly Smiling Face emoji    (n = 71), and Smiling Face 
with Heart-Eyes emoji    (n = 24 times; see Appendix A). The data is visually displayed as 
an emoji cloud in Figure 2. The emoji cloud is a visual of all the types of emojis used; the 
larger the emoji, the more frequently it was used by participants. 
 
Figure 2 – Types of Emojis Used to Support Cognitive Presence 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
 
Note. Word cloud created by the authors on worditout.com. Retrieved from 
https://worditout.com/word-cloud/4345794 
 
As stated in the analysis, the Clapping Hands emoji    was the most frequently used emoji to 
support cognitive presence. To understand how emojis were used to support cognitive 
presence, rich descriptions from the text (i.e., WhatsApp course interactions) are included. 
Below is an interaction in Group 2 (coded as integration), where this emoji was used by 
Participant C after his peers inspired him to create his own class materials. 
 
Participant A: I would use either selfies or braggies with new classes, as ice-
breakers, so they can know each other. But I loved all the ideas people! They're 
super doable! ❤ 
Participant B: For sure! 
Participant C: Those are great ideas. I have never worked with selfies and braggies 
but now I am looking forward to it!                
Participant C: As I work with technical courses, I usually teach Ss who take 
photography related disciplines. We use their photographs of our city to work 
descriptions and directions. But now, I'll love to work with the selfies! 
                   
 
The second example shows a discussion on the use of GPS for pedagogical purposes in Group 
3. Participant B adds his ideas to the topic and also gives positive feedback to Participant A’s 
suggestions on how to integrate the GPS in the classroom. Participant B uses both the 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
Smirking Face With Starry Eyes emoji    and the Clapping Hands emoji    to support 
cognitive presence. These emojis illustrate the connection of ideas during these discussions. 
 
Participant A: “Besides the great ideas already given, I believe we could also try a 
cross curricular approach, or even a CLIL class, teaching cartography and scale, 
which are Geography topics, in English. Apps [such as] Google Maps, GPS location 
and Google Earth would make the experience much more instigating and real. 
Students could also draw maps and places found in the city on different scales, 
which would require some artistic and math skills as well.” 
Participant B: “It's possible to include History, art history, biology and others, 
depending on the project we'd like to develop.” 
Participant B: “          ” 
Participant A: “Of course! They could analise how things have changed along the 
years: the streets, traffic signs, buildings’ facades, vegetation. The human action 
affecting urban and rural environments... Even writing production could be 
explored.” 
 
In Group 6, the use of emojis such as Clapping Hands, Smiling Face and Thumbs-Up shows 
Participant B’s appreciation for the discussions on how to raise awareness of fake news in the 
language classroom as well as his intention to apply these new ideas in class. These were 
coded as an indicator of the category resolution in CoI. 
 
Participant A: “I would talk to students about the importance of checking if they 
can trust every text they find on the internet or even facebook, instagram or 
whatsapp groups messages. I'd send them some texts and provide a material which 
could help them to identify fake news and ask them to analyze those texts.  
Participant B: “I loved your strategy       ” 
Participant B: “I’d do the same as you. Actually I’ll plan a lesson following your 
idea and I’ll share my experience here later. I haven’t taught anything about fake 
news yet, so it’s gonna be my first attempt.
  ” 
 
Different cognitive manifestations were identified in all six groups throughout the course and 
appeared to sustain communication during the course, as shown in the examples in Table 3, be 
they to trigger an event by clarifying any confusions, exploring different experiences and 
information, integrating ideas from situated contexts throughout the flow of interactions, and 
incorporating new ideas in their teaching practices. 
 
Table 3 – Cognitive Manifestations in the Groups 
 
Indicators 
Excerpts from course interactions 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
Sense of 
puzzlement 
“Are we going to learn how to make videos like this? Is it possible?   ” (Group 
3) 
Information 
Exchange 
“I suppose they love to do It. Compare with us! Everyone here so happy sharing 
our experience here  ” (Group 1) 
“awesome idea   I’ll try this out!” (Group 6) 
Connecting  
ideas 
“I think that would be cool the students make a tour by the city and take selfies 
in monuments, interesting places as a presentation of our homeland to a 
stranger. "Bora" value our culture!❣” (Group 5) 
“As I work with technical courses, I usually teach Ss who take photography 
related disciplines. We use their photographs of our city to work descriptions 
and directions. But now, I'll love to work with the selfies! 
                  ” (Group 2)  
Apply new 
ideas 
“In this case, in public School, that some of them didn't have smartphone even 
internet. What did I do? I print some balloons like a model of smartphone. 
Then they create a dialogue between them  ” (Group 1) 
 
The connection of ideas, the exchange of information, and the new ideas to be applied in the 
language classroom that emerged from these interactions reveal not only evidence of 
construction of meaning, but also the potential of WhatsApp to mediate educational 
experiences. 
 
Teaching presence 
 
Frequency distributions were conducted on all interactions to determine what type of emojis 
were used to support teaching presence. To represent teaching presence, the most frequently 
used emojis were Winking Face emoji    (n = 56 times), Clapping Hands emoji    (n = 29 
times), Face With Tears of Joy emoji    (n = 20 times), Thumbs-Up emoji    (n = 18 
times), Rolling On The Floor Laughing emoji    (n = 14 times), Beaming Face with Smiling 
Eyes emoji    (n = 13 times), Smiling Face with Hearts emoji    (n = 12 times), Smiling 
Face with Heart-Eyes emoji    (n = 12 times), Backhand Index Pointing Up emoji    (n = 
12 times); and Face Blowing a Kiss emoji    (n = 10 times; see Appendix A). The data is 
visually displayed as an emoji cloud in Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3 – Types of emojis used to support Teaching Presence 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
 
Note. Word cloud created by the authors on worditout.com. Retrieved from 
https://worditout.com/word-cloud/4346141 
 
As interactions via WhatsApp are instant and allow on-demand response, teaching presence 
was manifested not only by the teachers, but also by course participants who were available 
and who felt comfortable contributing. During the course, the Mobile Phone emoji    was 
used every time the teachers and tutors interacted with the group. This was a strategy to help 
course participants identify the teachers’ post, tasks, or interventions to build understanding of 
a type of digital genre. As this emoji served as a pedagogical strategy and did not emerge 
from the interactions in the course, it was not coded as teaching presence and not analyzed as 
such. 
 
As shown in the data analyses and in the cloud maps, different types of emojis were identified 
as teaching presence. The Winking Face emoji    was often used to minimize the impact of 
interventions such as confirming and understanding a task, encouraging participants’ 
contributions, keeping the focus of discussions on the task, etc. The following example 
illustrates how this emoji was used to encourage participants’ contributions in Group 1. It can 
also be seen that the Smiling Face emoji    was used to acknowledge participants' 
contributions. 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
Teacher A: “  Hi everyone! You have created and shared great memes! If you 
haven't sent your meme, we are looking forward to it!    ” 
“Send an audio message describing the meme/GIF you have chosen. It's great to see 
your comments on your peers' reviews   .” 
“Make sure you write an informative one so that your peers feel like commenting. 
  ” 
 
The next example demonstrates that oftentimes the course participants played the role of a 
teacher in the course. In the following post from Group 3, Participant B even ‘copied’ the 
Mobile Phone emoji    used by teachers to suggest apps and articles for the task. B also 
included the Up Pointing Index emoji    and the Smiling Face emoji    in his posts to 
encourage his peer to develop the task. 
 
Participant A: “Sorry, I don’t know how to create memes      ” 
Participant B: “   *Meme:* 
http://makeameme.org/  https://imgflip.com/memegenerator [...] 
*Animated GIF:* 
https://giphy.com/ [...] 
When you’re finished, copy the ‘GIF link’ on WhatsApp!_ 
Read the article “How-memes can make lessons interesting” 
U can use it    
   I've done it n' really worked” 
 
As was the case with the discussions on the intertwining of both cognitive and social 
presence, interactions identified as teaching presence were also marked by the presence of 
emojis. These emojis facilitated the interventions of both teachers and tutors as well as the 
participants' own intervention initiatives. 
 
Teaching and instructional manifestations, although mainly initiated by the teachers and 
tutors, as seen in Table 4, were also identified in interactions posted by course participants. 
These manifestations happened during instructional management, meaning construction, and 
direct instruction. 
 
Table 4 – Teaching Manifestations in the Groups 
 
Indicators 
Excerpts from course interactions 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
Defining and 
initiating 
discussion topics 
“I think you have added me to 2 groups    
Can I pls stay in just one?” (Group 1) 
“hi y'all! I'm not a digital game player myself so I think that resources 
related to entertainment (vernacular) games such as reviews, narratives, 
walkthrough, etc can be a way to integrate games in the classroom. What 
do you think of this strategy  ?” (Tutor’s post in group 4) 
Sharing personal 
meaning 
“Participant A: I'll start teaching about places and giving directions now and 
you have given me a nice idea to work with my students. This can be done 
using google maps as well, right? Students can write reviews about places 
they have gone. 
Participant B: I had the same idea.   ” (Group 6) 
“[participant’s name], I also had the opportunity to work with a deaf student 
some years ago. Exploring multimodal and digital resources was very 
effective to engage him with the classes and classmates. I believe going 
digital with our practice can be a way of real integration and not just 
creating special and different materials for one student. Nowadays, there 
are many websites with ideas and activities. I can send you later.” (Tutor’s 
post in group 1) 
Focusing  
discussion 
“Guys, let's think about what a good review should contain... It is different 
from a comment..      check the example on the posts!” (Tutor’s post 
in group 4) 
“Make sure you write an informative one so that your peers feel like 
commenting.   ” (Tutor’s post in group 5) 
 
Throughout the posts, social presence led participants to feel comfortable playing the role of 
teacher, something quite positive in a social environment such as WhatsApp, in which the 
dynamicity and the number of messages often call for a participant available at any time to 
step up, as can be seen in the excerpts above. Structuring and facilitating class management 
and instruction shows that social presence plays an important role supporting teaching 
presence. 
 
Social presence 
 
To determine what type of emojis were used to support social presence, frequency 
distributions were conducted on all interactions. To support social presence, the most 
frequently used emoji were the Winking Face emoji    (n = 158 times) and the Clapping 
Hands emoji    (n = 153 times), followed by Thumbs-Up emoji    (n = 74 times), Face 
With Tears of Joy emoji    (n = 68 times), Smiling Face With Smiling Eyes emoji    (n = 
64 times), Smiling Face emoji 
 (n = 60 times), Smiling Face with Hearts emoji    (n = 59 
times), Smiling Face with Heart-Eyes emoji    (n = 41 times), Slightly Smiling Face emoji 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
   (n = 40), Face Blowing a Kiss emoji    (n = 35 times), Beaming Face with Smiling Eyes 
emoji    (n = 31 times), and Grinning Face emoji    (n = 31 times; see Appendix A). 
Please see Figure 4 for a visualization of the emoji cloud. 
 
Figure 4 – Types of Emojis Used to Support Social Presence 
 
 
Note. Word cloud created on worditout.com.  
Retrieved from https://worditout.com/word-cloud/4345830 
 
Social and affective manifestations such as emotion expression, humor, greetings, and 
acknowledgement of others were identified in all six groups throughout the course and 
appeared to create a community atmosphere as demonstrated in the examples below. 
 
Table 5 – Social and Affective Manifestations in the Groups 
 
Indicators 
Excerpts from course interactions 
Emotion 
expressions 
 
“After a busy day... a little messed up  I am [participant`s name] and I am 
part of Taba's team.” (a tutor’s post in group 4) 
“I’m answering the activities.   ” (Group 3) 
“I guess we first have to fulfill the expectations for the previous task  ” 
(Group 5) 
Humor  
 
“I’m feeling like a zombie    ♂ !  ” (a tutor’s post in group 1) 
“Lucky u it was on this day...    Just kiddin'” (Group 3) 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
“Remember! I'm 55 years old            ” (Group 1) 
Greetings  
 
“Glad to meet you too    ” (Group 3) 
“Good night to all of you! I'm sleepy. God bless you! See them tomorrow! 
        ” (Group 5) 
“Happy easter, everyone!     ” (Group 2) 
Acknowledging 
others 
 
“  Congrats for being the first one to post your        ” (a tutor’s post in 
group 5) 
“Thanks [participant`s name]for helping me    ” (Group 3) 
“Great presentation!!!     ” (Group 1) 
“U can use it   ” (Group 3) 
Group cohesion 
 
 
“We are together   ” (Group 3) 
“Hi, [participant’s name]! I'm glad you're here, buddy!     ” (a tutor’s post 
in group 1) 
“Kicking off the ball.    Getting ready to start working! A blessed Wednesday 
for you all!   ” (Group 1) 
 
The findings regarding the high number of emojis coded as social presence seem to reveal a 
trait of the Brazilian culture. Brazilians are locally and internationally known for having a 
very joyful, affectionate, and friendly nature. Instances of a great number of Red Heart emoji 
❤, Face Throwing a Kiss emoji   , and Smiling Face With Smiling Eyes And Three Hearts 
emoji 
  shown in Figure 4, although more frequent in the interactions coded as social 
presence, were also identified in the interactions coded as cognitive and teaching presences.  
 
Another point that has contributed to the high frequency of emojis identified as social 
presence is that WhatsApp is an application that allows almost real time replies as users can 
answer messages instantly. This feature of WhatsApp may have been used to signal that the 
participants were following the course of interactions, often using short messages with emojis 
or only emojis as teachers are always on go. As Pegrum (2014) claims, the essence of mobile 
learning happens on demand or just in time interactions that are usually combined with 
brevity and not too much or too little information. 
 
The use of emojis in interactions via WhatsApp seems to  corroborate Paiva’s (2016) idea that 
“the increasing use of emojis is an attempt to convey more meaning in a more economical 
manner in given contexts of interactions. This is the case of emojis that seemed to indicate 
that participants were following the course of interactions. Moreover, the findings suggest that 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
emojis can also be used to give support to ideas or minimize the impact of some written 
interactions as shown in the findings. 
 
Relating Participants’ Attitudes to the Use of Emojis 
 
In order to determine how participants’ attitudes relate to the use of emojis for cognitive, 
teaching, and social presences, three Spearman Rho analyses were conducted with 
participants’ responses on the post survey (N = 61) and emoji use for each of the presences. 
Results of the Spearman Rho analysis suggested that emoji use in terms of cognitive presence 
was significantly, positively correlated to participants’ attitudes regarding their readiness to 
use mobile devices in the language classroom (rs = .32, p = .01). In other words, the more 
ready they are to use mobile devices, the more often they used emojis to support cognitive 
presence throughout the course. This suggests that the more familiarity participants had with 
WhatsApp, the more likely they were to use all of its resources, including emojis, to exchange 
information, connect ideas, and apply new knowledge. However, emoji use in terms of social 
(rs = .20, p = .12) or teaching presence (rs = -.09, p = .48) failed to correlate to participants’ 
attitudes regarding their readiness to use mobile devices in the language classroom. Given the 
rise in popularity in emoji use in the last decade, it is not surprising that participants used 
emojis similarly, regardless of their attitudes, to encourage collaboration and express their 
emotions. What was probably most surprising was that participants, as discussed in the 
Teaching Presence section above, took on the role of teacher frequently to assist other 
students in the class, regardless of their attitudes, which explains why these items were not 
correlated. See Table 6. 
 
Table 6 – The Relationship Between Attitudes and Emoji Use 
 
 
Ready to Use 
Willingness to Apply 
Presence 
N 
rs 
p 
N 
rs 
p 
Cognitive Presence 
61 
.32 
.01* 
61 
.31 
.02* 
Teaching Presence 
61 
-.09 
.48 
61 
-.01 
.94 
Social Presence 
61 
.20 
.12 
61 
.24 
.06 
Note. Significant at the .05 level. 
 
Additionally, emoji use in terms of cognitive presence was significantly, positively correlated 
to participants’ attitudes regarding their willingness to apply mobile technologies (i.e., 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
smartphones, tablets, and apps) to enable and empower learners with diverse backgrounds, 
characteristics, and abilities (rs = .31, p = .02). In other words, the more willing they were to 
apply mobile technologies, the more often they used emojis to exchange ideas and apply new 
ideas throughout the course. Emoji use in terms of social presence was positively correlated to 
participants’ attitudes regarding their willingness to apply mobile technologies, but failed to 
reach significance (rs = .24, p = .06). Finally, emoji use in terms of teaching presence is not 
correlated to participants’ willingness to apply mobile technologies, (rs = -.01, p = .94). 
According to Whiteside (2015), when instructors were able to create social presence in their 
courses, as was the case in the present study, students take on a more active role in 
constructing their own knowledge, as well as their peers, regardless of experience. Therefore, 
in the present study, regardless of participants’ willingness to apply mobile technologies to 
empower others, they felt connected and helped shape each others’ learning. See Table 6. 
 
Relating Participants’ Demographics to the Use of Emojis 
 
To determine how age relates to emoji use, four Spearman Rho analyses were conducted. The 
ages of the participants ranged from 21 years of age to 60 years of age, with a mean age of 38 
years. The results of the analyses revealed no significant correlations for age as it relates to 
cognitive presence (rs = -.07, p = .62), teaching presence (rs = .10, p = .44), social presence (rs 
= .04, p = .74), or total presence (rs = -.002, p = .99; see Table 7). In a study by Fullwood, 
Orchard, and Floyd (2013) on emoji use in internet chat rooms, no significant differences 
existed across age groups in terms of emoji use. Similarly, Alshenqeeti (2016) suggested that 
age was not as strong of a predictor of emoji use compared to technological awareness and 
capability. Therefore, the findings of the current study align with other studies on age and 
emoji use. 
 
Table 7 – The Relationship Between Age and Emoji Use 
 
 
Age 
 
 
Presence 
N 
rs 
p 
Cognitive Presence 
61 
-.07 
.62 
Teaching Presence 
61 
.10 
.44 
Social Presence 
61 
.04 
.74 
Total Presence 
61 
-.002 
.99 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
Finally, to determine how gender affects the use of emojis, four independent samples t tests 
were conducted with gender as the IV and emoji use for each type of presence as the DV. Of 
the 61 survey participants, 39 were females and 21 were males, and one participant did not 
specify. In terms of cognitive presence, female participants (M = 10.13, SD = 14.30) used 
emojis to represent cognitive presence slightly more than male participants (M = 8.00, SD = 
8.38), though not significantly, t(58) = .63, p = .53 (see Tables 8 and 9).  
 
Table 8 – Descriptive Statistics for Gender and Emoji Use 
 
 
Male Participants 
Female Participants 
Presence 
n 
M 
SD 
n 
M 
SD 
Cognitive Presence 
21 
8.00 
8.38 
39 
10.13 
2.29 
Teaching Presence 
21 
.00 
.00 
39 
.13 
.34 
Social Presence 
21 
9.67 
9.87 
39 
12.97 
19.84 
Total Presence 
21 
5.89 
6.02 
39 
7.75 
11.27 
 
Table 9 – Gender and Emoji Use t-test results 
 
Presence 
t 
df 
p 
Mean Difference 95% CI 
Cognitive Presence 
.63 
58 
.53 
2.13 
(-4.68, 8.94) 
Teaching Presence 
2.36 
38 
.02* 
.13 
(-.02, .28) 
Social Presence 
.72 
58 
.48 
3.31 
(-5.94, 12.56) 
Total Presence 
.70 
58 
.49 
1.85 
(-3.44, 7.15) 
Note. Significant at the .05 level. 
 
In terms of teaching presence, female participants (M = .13, SD = .34) used emojis to 
represent teaching presence significantly more than male participants, who did not use them at 
all (M = .00, SD = .00), t(38) = 2.36, p = .02. In terms of social presence, female 
participants(M = 12.97, SD = 19.84) used emojis to represent social presence slightly more 
than male participants (M = 9.67, SD = 9.87), though not significantly, t(58) = .72, p = .48. 
Finally, in terms of total presence, female participants (M = 7.74, SD = 11.27) used emojis 
slightly more than male participants (M = 5.89, SD = 6.02), though not significantly, t(58) = 
.70, p = .49.  
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
As shown in the analysis of the data, female participants’ use of emojis had an impact in the 
frequency of interactions during the course. Moreover, as can be seen in Figure 5, these 
participants were the ones who added a more affectionate response to these interactions by 
posting a great number emojis that represent affection such as the Face Throwing a Kiss emoji 
  , Smiling Face With Heart-Eyes emoji   , Red Heart emoji ❤, Cherry Blossom emoji 
  , etc. Figure 5 also shows evidence that the high frequency of the eight most used emojis 
was boosted by female participants.  
 
Besides the affectionate response, which can be considered a strategy of group proximity, 
Figure 5 shows a high number of the clapping emoji which was used when participants 
completed a task, working as a positive reinforcement in the group. This type of feedback can 
be considered a strategy to increase members proximity and keep group cohesion. The 
Clapping Hands emoji   , Thumbs-Up emoji   , Winking Face emoji   , Face With Tears 
of Joy emoji   , and the Smiling Face With Smiling Eyes emoji    were highly used by 
female participants as non-verbal communication resources to make up for the absence of 
gestures used in face-to-face interactions. As Alshenqeeti (2016, p. 64) claims, “visual forms 
of language, which include non-verbal communication such as body language have been used 
since prehistoric times to underline and reinforce verbal language. Emojis therefore, are 
simply placing these visual forms into the digital arena.”  
 
Figure 5 – Gender and Types of Emoji Used 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
 
 
The findings support Fullwood et al.’s (2013) research results that women were more likely to 
use emojis than men and seem to corroborate Alshenqeeti’s (2016) discussions that women 
tend to be more expressive and emotional in their communication than men when it comes to 
the use of emojis. In addition to the gender use of emojis, Alshenqeeti (2016) draws attention 
to the fact that emojis are context situated and, as such, cultural variations may influence their 
use. In this respect, the high frequency of emojis identified in the interactions of Brazilian 
teachers also seem both culturally situated and gender related. 
 
5. Conclusion  
 
As demonstrated in the results, emojis are largely used to support cognitive, teaching, and 
social presence. Most emojis fell into WhatsApp’s categories of face emojis, people, and 
gestures. The findings suggest that communication in the context of social networks is 
becoming more visual and multimodal as evidenced by the use of emojis and more recently 
by the use of stickers as pointed by Paiva (2016) - this is also the case of gifs, widely used in 
social media. We share Paiva’s ideas that language social practices take place in a complex 
manner due to the relationship among the various agents and the ways of producing meaning 
and the technologies mediating these practices. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
 
The analysis evinces that face emojis are very much used as social affective manifestations 
that are oftentimes intertwined in the interactions coded as cognitive and teaching presence. 
This supports the findings of Garrison at al. (2007), Molinari (2010), Celani and Collins 
(2005), and Beuchot and Bullen (2005), who view social presence as a foundation for 
cognitive presence. Thus, it is possible to affirm that emojis, like written discourse and 
emoticons, are elements in online interactions that may support cognitive presence. 
 
As pointed out in the findings, the course interactions also reveal that the meaning of emojis 
may be interpreted differently depending on the context in which they are situated. Many 
times the wink emoji could be interpreted in such a way as to minimize the impact of an 
intervention, but at other times it could be interpreted as merely an ‘ok’. It is worth 
mentioning that the emojis were many times used as non-verbal communication resources to 
make up for the absence of gestures, used in face-to-face interactions, to increase members' 
proximity and keep group cohesion. In that vein, emojis can be understood as agents in the 
production of meaning (Paiva, 2016); their use in digital social spaces for teaching and 
learning also seems to have pedagogical implications, such as community engagement, group 
cohesion, task management, non-verbal communication, language use, to name a few. As 
mentioned in the discussions, the use of emojis can be a great ally to engage participants and 
build a sense of belonging in this type of community, as well as keep the community 
cohesion. Emojis can also be used to keep course participants on task and provide just-in-time 
feedback on the pedagogical activities. Another pedagogical implication is that emojis can be 
used to make up for lack of visual cues, usually present in face-to-face communication. 
However, the high frequency of single line emojis, i.e., using only emojis to interact or 
respond to tasks, may be problematic in the context of education, especially language 
learning, as written interactions do play an important role in exchanging information, 
negotiating meaning and developing language. 
 
The number and the types of emojis used in online interactions in educational experiences like 
this one via WhatsApp may be gender-related and culturally situated. These findings can be 
taken into consideration when promoting educational initiatives via WhatsApp or any other 
social space related to social media in multicultural environments. Current trends continue to 
move towards the need to create more opportunities for social presence in our learning 
communities and classrooms. Harn (2017) reported on the visual language of emojis and 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
recommended that higher education should consider using emojis in informal communication 
to reduce social barriers, create connections, and improve overall connections with students 
by establishing a more personal connection in the communication through the emojis. This 
research supports that social presence was enhanced during the learning process. Using emojis 
in the communication lightened the tone of the communication by creating a friendly open 
trusting rapport, which increased social presence.  
 
Using this type of communication can improve learning experiences in many training and 
learning settings. The need to evaluate and develop collaborative educational communication, 
which corresponds with present-day realities, should be explored taking into account 
pedagogical implication to improve the overall learning environment. As different types of 
language emerge in these spaces, educators and students should be aware of how different 
cultures make meaning while interacting. What seems to be a natural way of interacting in a 
country like Brazil may be considered inadequate in another culture. The same goes for the 
meaning of the emojis. Raising awareness of these possible differences may be a new element 
to add to the netiquette of similar future educational initiatives. 
 
Conflict of interests (multiple authors) 
 
( X ) The authors declare they have no conflict of interest. 
 
Credit Author Statement 
 
We, Jennifer L. Reeves, Glenda A. Gunter, Junia Braga and Marcos Racilan, hereby declare that we do 
not have any potential conflict of interest in this study. We have all participated in study 
conceptualization, methodology, study design, data collection, formal data analysis, statistical data 
analysis, data validation and editing. All authors approve the final version of the manuscript and are 
responsible for all aspects, including the guarantee of its veracity and integrity. 
 
References 
 
Alshenqeeti, H. (2016). Are emojis creating a new or old visual language for new 
generations? a socio-semiotic study. Advances in Language and Literary Studies, 7(6). 
http://dx.doi.org/10.7575/aiac.alls.v.7n.6p.56 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
Bai, Q., Dan, Q., Mu, Z., & Yang, M. (2019). A Systematic Review of Emoji: Current 
Research and Future Perspectives. Frontiers in psychology, 10, 2221. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02221 
Braga, J. C. F. (2007). Comunidades autônomas de aprendizagem on-line na perspectiva da 
complexidade. [Unpublished doctoral dissertation]. Faculdade de Letras, Universidade Federal 
de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte. http://hdl.handle.net/1843/ALDR-7ABNS2. (accessed 26 
October, 2021) 
Beuchot, A., & Bullen, M. (2005). Interaction and interpersonality in online discussion 
forums. Distance Education, 26(1), 67-87. https://doi.org/10.1080/01587910500081285 
Celani, M. A. A., & Collins, H. (2005). Critical thinking in reflective sessions and in online 
interactions. AILA Review, 18(1), 41-57. https://doi.org/10.1075/aila.18.05cel 
Chen, Y., Lei J., & Cheng, J. (2019). What if online students take on the responsibility: 
students’ cognitive presence and peer facilitation techniques. Online Learning Journal, 23(1), 
37-61. https://doi.org/10.24059/olj.v23i1.1348 
Creswell, J. W., & Plano Clark, V. L. (2018). Designing and conducting mixed methods 
research (3rd ed.). Sage.  
Crystal, D. (2004). Language and the Internet. Cambridge University Press. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511487002 
 
d’Alessio, M. A., Lundquist, L. L., Schwartz, J. J., Pedone, V., Pavia, J., & Fleck, J. (2019). 
Social presence enhances student performance in an online geology course but depends on 
instructor facilitation. Journal of Geoscience Education, 67(3), 222-236. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10899995.2019.1580179  
 
Emoji Meanings. (2020). Emoji and their meaning. https://www.emojimeanings.net/ (accessed 
October 26, 2021). 
 
Fullwood, C., Orchard, L. J., & Floyd, S. A. (2013). Emoticon convergence in Internet chat 
rooms. Social Semiotics, 23(5), 648-662. https://doi.org/10.1080/10350330.2012.739000 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
 
Garrison, D. R., Anderson, T., & Archer, W. (1999). Critical inquiry in a text-based 
environment: Computer conferencing in higher education. The Internet and Higher 
Education, 2(2/3), 87-105. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1096-7516(00)00016-6 
 
Garrison, D. R., & Arbaugh, J. B. (2007). Researching the community of inquiry framework: 
review, issues, and future directions. Internet and Higher Education, 10(3), 157-172. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iheduc.2007.04.001 
 
Gunter, G. A., & Reeves, J. L. (2017). Online professional development embedded with 
mobile learning: An examination of teachers’ attitudes, engagement, and dispositions. British 
Journal of Educational Technology, 48(6), 1305-1317. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.12490 
 
Harn, R.W. J. (2017). The visual language of emojis: A study on college students’ social 
support communication in online social networks. [Unpublished doctoral dissertation]. 
University of Kansas. https://kuscholarworks.ku.edu/handle/1808/26036. (accessed 26 
October, 2021) 
 
Kuehn, S. (1993). Communication innovation on a BBS: A content analysis. Interpersonal 
Computing and Technology. An Electronic Journal for the 21st Century, 1(2). 
http://serials.infomotions.com/ipct/ipct-v1n02-kuehn-communication.txt. (accessed 26 
October, 2021) 
 
Micsky, T., & Foels, L. (2019) Community of Inquiry (CoI): A framework for social work 
distance educators. Journal of Teaching in Social Work, 39(4-5), 293-307. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/08841233.2019.1642976 
 
Molinari, D. L. (2010). The role of social comments in problem-solving groups in an online 
class. American Journal of Distance Education, 18(2), 89-101. 
https://doi.org/10.1207/s15389286ajde1802_3 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
 
Paiva, V. L. M. O. (2016). A linguagem dos emojis. Trabalhos em Linguística Aplicada, 
Campinas, 55(2), 379-399. https://doi.org/10.1590/010318134955176321 
 
Pegrum, M. (2014). Mobile learning: languages, literacies and cultures. London: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
 
Rath, V. O. (2012). An investigation of online tools and teaching, social, and cognitive 
presence in a large hybrid online course. [Unpublished doctoral dissertation]. University of 
Central Florida, Orlando, FL. https://stars.library.ucf.edu/etd/4485/. (accessed 26 October, 
2021) 
 
Rolim, V., Ferreira, R., Lins, R. D., & Gǎsević, D. (2019). A network-based analytic approach 
to uncovering the relationship between social and cognitive presences in communities of 
inquiry. Internet and Higher Education, 42, 53-65. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iheduc.2019.05.001 
 
Walther, J. B. (1994). Anticipated ongoing interaction versus channel effects on relational 
communication in computer-mediated interaction. Human Communication Research, 20, 473-
501. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2958.1994.tb00332.x 
 
Whiteside, A. L. (2015). Introducing the social presence model to explore blended and online 
learning experience. Online Learning, 19(2), 1-20. http://dx.doi.org/10.24059/olj.v19i2.453 
 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
Appendix A – Types of Emojis Used to Support Cognitive, Teaching, and Social Presence 
 
Emoji 
Cognitive 
(n) 
Teaching 
(n) 
Social 
(n) 
Total 
(n) 
   
4 
1 
6 
11 
   
14 
2 
20 
36 
   
47 
18 
74 
139 
   
2 
1 
4 
6 
   
4 
1 
11 
16 
   
40 
12 
59 
111 
   
9 
8 
18 
34 
   
107 
29 
153 
161 
   
21 
6 
31 
56 
   
0 
0 
4 
4 
 
47 
5 
60 
112 
   
31 
0 
40 
71 
   
0 
0 
2 
2 
   
0 
0 
3 
3 
   ♂ 
0 
0 
2 
2 
   
2 
1 
5 
8 
   
0 
2 
5 
7 
   
1 
4 
4 
9 
   
37 
56 
158 
251 
   
13 
10 
35 
58 
   
24 
12 
41 
77 
   
33 
20 
68 
121 
   
9 
7 
17 
33 
❤ 
10 
5 
21 
36 
   
51 
5 
64 
120 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
   
20 
4 
23 
47 
   
17 
12 
8 
37 
   
4 
2 
5 
11 
   
10 
1 
9 
20 
   
9 
5 
17 
31 
    
2 
0 
3 
5 
   
0 
1 
2 
3 
   
1 
1 
2 
4 
   
15 
13 
31 
59 
   
6 
2 
4 
12 
   
2 
0 
3 
5 
✈ 
0 
2 
0 
2 
   
9 
3 
12 
24 
   
3 
0 
3 
6 
    
7 
14 
20 
41 
   
3 
0 
2 
5 
   
2 
0 
1 
3 
   
2 
0 
0 
2 
   
2 
0 
3 
5 
   
0 
6 
6 
12 
   
1 
0 
7 
8 
❣ 
3 
5 
9 
17 
   
4 
0 
9 
13 
   
3 
3 
10 
16 
   
4 
5 
2 
11 
   
3 
0 
3 
6 
   
6 
0 
9 
15 
   
2 
0 
2 
4 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
   
0 
0 
2 
2 
   
0 
6 
4 
10 
   
1 
0 
4 
5 
   
1 
0 
4 
5 
   
3 
4 
7 
14 
   
5 
1 
7 
13 
   
8 
0 
10 
18 
   
0 
2 
1 
3 
   
8 
0 
1 
9 
   
2 
0 
1 
3 
   
2 
0 
2 
4 
   
1 
1 
2 
4 
✅ 
3 
0 
0 
3 
   
16 
0 
0 
16 
Note. Only emojis that were used more than one time were included in the table.  
The emojis were listed in this table in the order they appear in the interactions. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202152396
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
This preprint was submitted under the following conditions: 
The authors declare that they are aware that they are solely responsible for the content of the preprint and
that the deposit in SciELO Preprints does not mean any commitment on the part of SciELO, except its
preservation and dissemination.
The authors declare that the necessary Terms of Free and Informed Consent of participants or patients in
the research were obtained and are described in the manuscript, when applicable.
The authors declare that the preparation of the manuscript followed the ethical norms of scientific
communication.
The submitting author declares that the contributions of all authors and conflict of interest statement are
included explicitly and in specific sections of the manuscript.
The authors agree that the approved manuscript will be made available under a Creative Commons CC-BY
license.
The deposited manuscript is in PDF format.
The authors declare that the data, applications, and other content underlying the manuscript are
referenced.
The authors declare that the manuscript was not deposited and/or previously made available on another
preprint server or published by a journal.
If the manuscript is being reviewed or being prepared for publishing but not yet published by a journal, the
authors declare that they have received authorization from the journal to make this deposit.
The submitting author declares that all authors of the manuscript agree with the submission to SciELO
Preprints.
The authors declare that the research that originated the manuscript followed good ethical practices and
that the necessary approvals from research ethics committees, when applicable, are described in the
manuscript.
The authors agree that if the manuscript is accepted and posted on the SciELO Preprints server, it will be
withdrawn upon retraction.
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
