1
Rev Bras Enferm. 2020;73(Suppl 2): e2020sup2
2
of
SUPPLEMENTARY EDITION 2
CORONAVÍRUS/COVID-19
http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/0034-7167-202073suppl201
Worldwide, the countries that have achieved the best results in com-
bating the COVID-19 pandemic are those that have made social isolation; 
guaranteed health care for the population, in a sanitary and human 
emergency; increased the number of hospital beds and ICUs; carried out 
massive tests on their population; and took measures to maintain income 
and activate the economy. There is no dichotomy between saving lives and 
maintaining economic activity.
Against the civilized world, the hard core of the federal government chose 
to listen only to big businessmen, however, with arrogance, it started to 
defend only vertical isolation restricted to the elderly population and with 
comorbidities as an effective measure to contain the advance of coronavirus.
The circulation of large contingents of people in environments totally favor-
able to the spread of the virus (SARS-CoV-2) is contrary to Law 13,979/2020. 
This law was signed by the president, which establishes measures to deal 
with the public health emergency of international and national importance 
resulting from COVID-19. It aims to protect the community and reduce the 
speed of transmission of the disease so that the available health services 
are able to serve all people with severe symptoms of the disease.
The speech of the President of Brazil poses a false issue for the popula-
tion: facing the health or economic crisis to justify his choice to defend 
the strictly economic interests that will lead to the deepening of social 
exclusion with the logic of “sanitary hygiene” of people considered “dis-
posable”. They are those who are below the poverty line, at high risk and 
with social vulnerability. This is a group at risk to enter the statistics of an 
exponential growth of the pandemic by COVID-19 in Brazil, in April, and 
which will become part of alarming disease and death statistics. We can 
stop the chain of transmissibility of the virus (SARS-CoV-2), stay at home!
It is a genocidal plan and repudiated by ABEn. How many health profes-
sionals on the front line of direct assistance, who are at risk, will fall ill and 
die from the cases that this irresponsible discourse has the potential  to 
produce? Statistics show that it is 8%, but that is not all! It is the option to 
reduce the time of the evolution curve of human infection with Coronavirus, 
to protect the economy, even if it means explosive growth of cases and 
lack of assistance. It is the State’s lack of responsibility and the liberation 
of save yourself if you can. 
How many people will enter the work with the inconsequent thought 
of comparing COVID-19 to a “flu” or a “cold”? How many people will be 
without treatment condition by SUS, exposing workers even more? And 
what about all the people? It is not only the logic of the necropolitics, it 
is talked about the murder of workers who are at the forefront of health 
services in defense of the population, as is the case of nursing; about 2 mil-
lion professionals (nurses, assistants and nursing technicians) face to face 
with coronavirus, on the front to combat COVID-19. It is a topic of social 
relevance on health work. This speech by the President of the Republic will 
kill professionals who try to save their lives, and this is terrifying! We have 
to further mobilize our networks, the press and the general population to 
protect health professionals.
Nursing to combat the COVID-19 pandemic
Francisca Valda da SilvaI
ORCID: 0000-0002-6364-2241
I Retired professor at the Universidade Federal do Rio Grande 
do Norte. Doctor Honoris Causa at the Universidade Federal do 
Rio Grande do Norte. National Health Counselor. Coordinator 
of the Comissão Intersetorial de Recursos Humanos e Relações 
de Trabalho do Conselho Nacional de Saúde. President of ABEn 
Nacional – Administration from November 2019 to June 2020. 
Brasília, Federal District, Brazil.
How to cite this article:
Silva FV. Nursing to combat the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Rev Bras Enferm. 2020;73(Suppl 2):e2020sup2. 
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/0034-7167-202073suppl201
EDITORIAL
2
Rev Bras Enferm. 2020;73(Suppl 2): e2020sup2
2
of
Nursing to combat the COVID-19 pandemic
Silva FV. 
The ABEn Network (National, and State and Federal District Sec-
tions) is placed, with the population and other bodies, alongside 
nursing professionals, so that they receive labor and social security 
protection from the State, in addition to the due guarantee of working 
conditions (inputs, adequate number of professionals per team for 
each shift, guarantee of a resting place, access to quality and suf-
ficient PPE, etc.) for the correct and safe professional performance 
in the struggle for the health of the population and the right to life.
#NursingDefendsLife 
#NursingAgainstCoronavirus 
#StrengthChallengesNursing
#ABEnDefendsSUS 
#RevokingEC95 
#SUSCombatsCoronavirus
#TogetherWeWinCOVID-19 
