A fundamental fact about mutualisms relies on the fact that partner species 
often harbor some individuals that benefit from the use of resources and 
services of the interaction without providing any positive feedback to the 
other player. The role of these cheaters on the evolutionary dynamics of 
mutualisms has long been recognized, yet their broader consequences to the 
community level, and beyond species they interact with, is still poorly 
understood. Because mutualisms form networks that often involve dozens to 
hundreds of species in a given site, indirect effects generated by cheaters may 
cascade through the whole community, reshaping trait evolution. Here, we 
study how harboring cheating interactions can influence coevolution in 
mutualistic networks. We combine a coevolutionary model, empirical data on 
animal-plant mutualistic networks, and numerical simulations to show that 
the higher frequency of cheating interactions lead to the formation of groups 
of species phenotypically similar to each other and distinct from other groups, 
generating higher trait disparity. The resulting clustered trait patterns, in 
turn, change the patterns of interaction in simulated networks, fostering the 
formation of modules of interacting species. Our results indicate that cheaters 
in mutualisms contribute to generate phenotypic clusters in mutualisms, 
counteracting selection for convergence imposed by mutualistic patterns, and 
favoring the emergence of modules of interacting species. 

Selection imposed by ecological interactions is one of the main forces 
impacting phenotypic patterns observed across levels of biological 
organization (Thompson 2005). Selection imposed by ecological interactions 
partially shapes trait matching among interacting individuals (Zhang et al. 
2012), trait distributions within interacting populations (Bronstein et al. 2003), 
trait variation across populations of the same species (Thompson 2005), and 
trait patterns at the community level (Strauss & Irwin 2004). At the 
community level, ecological interactions can be a driving force leading to trait 
convergence (Wilson et al. 2012) and trait disparity (Siepielski & Benkman 
2010). In this sense, theory and empirical results indicate that distinct 
ecological interactions (e.g., mutualistic, antagonistic) may favor different trait 
outcomes at the community level (Thompson 1994). 

Mutualistic interactions, for example, can favor trait matching, which is 
the trait similarity between interacting species. Although mutualisms may 
also generate other trait patterns, such as intensification of traits (Anderson & 
Johnson 2008), trait matching is an observed pattern in a variety of 
mutualistic systems, such as pollination by flies and bees (Zhang et al. 2012, 
Santamaria & Rodríguez-Gironés 2007), seed dispersal by birds and bats 
(Galetti et al. 2013, Mello et al. 2011), and Müllerian rings in velvet ants 
(Wilson et al 2012). Hence, trait matching is an expected outcome of reciprocal 
selection that could favor higher interaction efficiency in mutualisms 
(Thompson 1994, Zhang et al. 2012). In contrast, antagonisms, such as 
parasites and hosts, favor trait mismatching between hosts and parasites, 
leading to several coevolutionary dynamics such as coevolutionary 
alternation and escalation, that favor the maintenance or the increase in trait 
variation across and within species (Andreazzi et al. 2017). 

Antagonisms and mutualisms are not isolated in nature but coexist in a 
variety of ways. Studies have explored the effects of combining mutualisms 
and antagonisms on population dynamics (e.g., Melián et al. 2009), 
community stability (e.g., Wilson et al. 2003), and network structure (e.g., 
Genini et al. 2010), highlighting the importance of considering the multiple 
outcomes that interactions may have at a single community and assigning the 
extremes of a gradient between mutualism and antagonism (Fontaine et al. 
2011, Rodríguez-Rodríguez et al. 2017). Individuals of the same species can 
function as antagonists or mutualistic partners of the same interacting species, 
e.g., seed-caching rodents acting as seed predators and seed dispersers of the 
same plant species (Loayza et al. 2014). In other scenarios, individuals may act 
as antagonisms of some species and as mutualisms of others (Gómez et al. 
2018, Gómez et al. 2014, Montesinos-Navarro et al. 2017). Finally, there are 
species in which individuals are specialized cheaters, exploring mutualistic 
interactions without providing any benefit in return like fig wasps and yucca 
moths (Bronstein 2001). Thus, in mutualistic interactions, selection may favor 
the evolution of life histories that exploit the resources and services provided 
by mutualistic partners without providing benefits, hereafter, cheating 
interactions (Bronstein 2001, Vieira et al. 2003). 

We are beginning to understand how cheaters interactions could drive 
evolutionary patterns in mutualisms, as species acting as a cheater or 
mutualist may affect coevolution and local adaptation. For example, the 
interaction between the plant Lithophragma parviflorum (Saxifragaceae) and the 
floral-parasitic moth Greya politella changes from parasitism to mutualism if 
the legitimate pollinators of L. parviflorum are absent in the community 
(Thompson & Cunningham 2002). A fundamental challenge to study 
evolutionary consequences of ecological interactions at the community level is 
that pairwise interactions affect each other within ecological networks. A 
cheating interaction happen with a negative effect on one partner and positive 
effect on the other one. In this context, evolutionary changes can cascade via 
indirect effects (Guimarães et al. 2017), affecting how species traits evolve and 
ultimately shaping how species interact in the community. As a consequence 
of the non-random patterns of interaction networks, central species play an 
important role in maintaining the structure of networks and, consequently, 
increasing the stability of selection pressures between species in the network 
(Martín Gonzáles et al. 2010). However, we still do not understand how 
central cheaters affect mutualistic coevolutionary dynamics.  

Here, we use a quantitative trait mathematical model, empirical 
networks of species interactions, and numerical simulations to investigate 
how cheaters interactions may affect coevolution in mutualistic networks. 
Specifically, we explore three main questions i) How do different frequencies 
of cheating interactions affect coevolutionary dynamics? Due to the arms race 
dynamics favored by cheaters coevolution, we expect a higher trait mismatch 
in scenarios with elevated frequencies of cheaters interactions. ii) Do central 
cheater species amplify the effect of cheaters interactions on trait evolution? 
Because central species can influence the trait evolution of several other 
species, we expect that central cheater species will amplify the effect of 
cheaters interactions on trait evolution in mutualistic networks. iii) What is 
the effect of cheating interactions on the structure of mutualistic networks? By 
assuming that cheaters interactions may favor arms race dynamics, one can 
expect higher trait matching among species involved in arms races, but 
increased trait mismatch with other partners, leading to the loss of 
interactions. Thus, we expect that higher frequencies of cheaters interactions 
will generate higher arms race dynamics and consequently, higher frequency 
of interaction loss, generating networks with higher modularity (Figure 1b). 

Our discrete-time, evolutionary model describes how the average trait of a 
species i, Zi, evolves due to selection imposed by ecological interactions and 
other environmental factors (e.g., abiotic conditions). In our model, the 
selection differential, S, and the additive genetic variance of the trait governs 
trait change across generations (Lande 1976). We assumed S has three 
components potentially affecting the evolution of the trait Z: the selection 
imposed by (i) mutualisms, (ii) cheating interactions, and (iii) other 
environmental factors. As a first approximation, we assume that, for a given 
interaction, species are either mutualistic partners or cheaters, but the same 
species may behave as a cheater for species j but as a mutualistic partner to 
species k. 

The mutualism component, Smi is defined as the sum of selective effects 
caused by all mutualistic partners of species i. We assume that selection 
imposed by mutualism favors trait matching among mutualistic partners. We 
also assume that perfect trait matching between partners i and j occurs if 
|Zj(t)-Zi(t)| = 0 (Guimarães et al. 2011). A given species may have multiple 
mutualistic partners and each partner may contribute differently to selection, 
where the contribution of partner j to selection on species i is described by 
mij(t). The total contribution of mutualistic partners to selection on Zi is 
defined as: <>

In the cheating component Sai, selection favors trait matching for the cheater 
species j (as in equation 1) but favors trait mismatch for the victim species i, 
defined as the species explored by the cheater. Like the mutualism 
component, in our model, the magnitude of the trait change is dictated by the 
evolutionary effect of species j on species i, vij(t). Selection for trait 
mismatching between cheater on victim is dictated by 𝜀𝑖𝑗: <> 

We assume if the trait difference between i and j is higher or equal to 𝜀𝑖𝑗, 
|Zj(t)-Zi(t)|  ≥𝜀𝑖𝑗, then δij=0, and the cheater species imposes no selection on 
the victim. Thus, 𝜀𝑖𝑗 represents a trait barrier preventing the interaction due to 
trait dissimilarity (e.g., Santamaria & Rodríguez-Gironés 2007). However, if 
|Zj(t)-Zi(t)|< 𝜀𝑖𝑗, then δij=1 and selection on victim i will favor the increase or 
decrease of trait values depending on Zj(t)-Zi(t). If Zj(t)-Zi(t) is positive, the signal 
of 𝜀𝑖𝑗 will be positive. Contrarily, if Zj(t)-Zi(t) is negative, the signal of 𝜀𝑖𝑗will 
negative (Andreazzi et al. 2017). Finally, we assumed that the environmental 
component Sei is the combined effects of all other selective pressures favoring 
an optimum trait value for each species, θi: <> 

Combining the three selection components described above (equations 1, 2, 
and 3), the evolutionary change of Zi in timestep t+1 is given by: <> , in which, φi is a compound parameter formed by additive genetic variance 
and the slope of the adaptive landscape. The parameter ϒi dictates the 
importance of ecological interactions versus environmental factors as selective 
pressures. Thus, trait evolution, in our model, is defined as: <> 

The evolutionary effects mij(t)and vij(t) that affect the magnitude of trait change 
due to the mutualism and cheating interactions, respectively, are defined as 
the relative effect of species j on i, such that mij(t)=amijqij(t) and vij(t)=avijqij(t). amij 
and avij depict, respectively, the presence of a mutualistic or a cheating 
interaction between species i and j. The term qij(t) is defined as: <>, where the parameter α controls the sensitivity of the evolutionary effect due 
to trait matching between species i and j and aik=1 if there is a mutualistic or a 
cheating interaction between i and k and aik = 0, otherwise. 

We use 24 empirical mutualistic networks available at the databases Web of 
Life (http://www.web-of-life.es/) and Interaction Web Database 
(http://ecologia.ib.usp.br/iwdb/index.html). These 24 networks include 
eight plant-pollinator networks, eight plant-frugivore networks, and eight 
ant-myrmecophyte networks. Each network is represented by an adjacency 
matrix (A) in which each species is represented by a single row and a single 
column of the matrix; each element of this matrix represents the presence or 
absence of the corresponding animal-plant interaction. Ant-myrmecophyte 
networks are commonly less connected, more modular, and less nested in 
comparison to seed dispersal and pollination networks, while seed dispersal 
networks are usually more nested and have a higher connectance than 
pollination and ant-myrmecophyte networks (Supporting Information, 
Guimarães 2020). 

Our simulations describe how the mean trait Z evolves in time (Figure 1a). 
The values and the description of the model parameters are depicted in Table 
1. Each simulation ends after 1000 timesteps, an amount of time that is 
sufficient to generate asymptotic trait values. In most simulations, however, 
the equilibrium was reached before 1000 timesteps. To reduce computational 
time, we assumed the equilibrium is achieved if |Zi(t+1) - Zi(t)|<10-4 for every 
species i, ending the simulation. We run 72.000 simulations, 3.000 per 
empirical network, where each simulation tracks how species traits change in 
time due to coevolution and the selective pressures from the environment 
(Figure 1a). All the simulations were performed in R v. 3.5.3 (R Core Team 
2018). In what follows, we explain how we used this modelling approach to 
explore each of our three questions. 

i) How do different frequencies of cheating interactions affect coevolutionary 
dynamics? 

We evaluated the impact of the emergence of cheating interactions on the 
coevolutionary process. For each simulation, we define a probability p that an 
interaction within a “mutualistic network” is not a mutualism per se but a 
cheating interaction. We explore values of p ranging from 0.01 to 1 to test how 
different frequencies of cheating interactions change the outcome of the 
coevolutionary process. Thus, in this first analysis, we assume that cheating 
interactions are randomly distributed across all interactions in the mutualism 
network, whereas the frequency of cheating interactions in the network is 
fixed in each simulation. This process of defining the outcome of interactions 
based on p generates a network with both positive and negative effects, 
merging the effect of mutualism and cheaters in a single network (Melián et 
al. 2009). Because we are defining a cheating interaction as interactions with a 
negative effect on one partner and positive effect on the other one (i.e., an 
antagonism), we prohibit the occurrence of double-negative effects between 
two species. For this purpose, we only apply the transformation from positive 
to negative effect based on p in the lower triangle of the adjacency matrix, 
therefore maintaining cheating interactions as a combination of positive and 
negative effects. We also assumed that the outcome of the interaction did not 
change across time. Such an approach does not allow us to explore the effects 
of conditional outcomes of many interactions, but it is a starting point to 
unravel how cheating interactions changes the outcome of coevolution. We 
performed a set of sensitivity analyses in which we relaxed the assumption of 
fixed outcomes of interactions in time, allowing interactions to shift from 
positive and negative outcomes during simulations. Our sensitivity analyses 
suggest that temporal variability on the interaction outcome does not 
influence our main results (Supporting Information). 

We characterized the coevolutionary dynamics by describing patterns 
in trait distributions across species. We first measure the average trait 
distance between species as a proxy for trait disparity in the network. We 
computed the mean pairwise distance (D), which is the sum of the Euclidean 
distances of species traits between all possible pairwise combinations between 
all species divided by the total number of pairwise combinations (Ciampaglio 
et al. 2001): <> to characterize the trait matching generated by the coevolutionary dynamics, 
we used Ward's hierarchical clustering analysis (Ward 1963) along with the 
GAP validation index, a pre analysis of the clustering algorithm for 
evaluating the optimized number of clusters in a given dataset (Tibshirani et 
al. 2001). We used this approach to compute the number of trait clusters 
between interacting species. 

ii) Do central cheater species amplify the effect of cheaters interactions on trait 
evolution? 

Some species do not provide benefit for any of their interaction partners, 
relying exclusively upon cheating interactions (Bronstein 2001). We 
hypothesize that exclusive cheaters species could amplify the effects of 
cheating interactions, i.e., leading to effects on trait distributions that are 
higher than observed in simulations with the same number of cheating 
interactions in the network but randomly distributed across all ecological 
interactions (see previous set of simulations). We expected that this effect 
would be even stronger if the exclusive cheaters species are highly connected 
or perform central roles in the network structure. To explore the role of these 
exclusive, highly connected cheaters species in affecting the coevolutionary 
outcome, we selected the most connected species of the network and assumed 
these species are only involved in cheating interactions. To do so, we calculate 
the degree centrality (Newman 2018), which is a standardized measure of the 
number of interactions of a given species on the mutualistic network. The 
weighted degree centrality Ci for a species i from a given set (e.g., floral 
visitors) is: <>, in which 𝑘𝑖 is the number of interactions of species i and No is the species 
richness from the opposite set of i (e.g., if species i is a floral visitor, the 
opposite set is formed by flowering plants). We computed a z-score to detect 
extreme values of species centrality and identify the most central species, <> where 𝐶̅ is the average value of degree centrality of the network and 𝜎 is the 
standard deviation of the degree centrality values. To test the effect of central 
cheaters species on trait evolution, we set all species with Si>1 as exclusive 
cheaters. Thus, we will have a network with central species as obligate 
cheaters - our Central scenario.  

Finally, we compare the coevolutionary dynamics of the Central 
scenario with the scenario in which cheating interactions were randomly 
distributed across the network (the Random scenario). To create the Random 
scenario, we measure the frequency of negative effects in networks (fCh) in the 
Central scenario, as shown in Equation 10, and use this value of frequency as 
a p in the networks of the Random scenario. We considered n(-+) as the 
number of cheating interactions and n(++) as the number of mutualistic 
interactions in the network. 

Thus, in the Random scenario, negative effects are not concentrated in central 
species but distributed across the network. For each combination of empirical 
networks (n = 24) and scenarios (Random and Central), we performed 1.500 
simulations, leading to a total of 72.000 simulations. We ran all simulations 
until the equilibrium. 

iii) What is the effect of cheating interactions on the structure of mutualistic 
networks? 

In our baseline coevolutionary model, the trait barrier 𝜀𝑖𝑗 indicates that the 
evolutionary effects of a cheater species on a victim became negligible. To 
explore the effect of cheating interactions on the network structure, we 
changed our baseline coevolutionary model to add an additional trait barrier, 
bij, defining the maximum absolute trait mismatch between two species traits 
so they can interact: <> 

Note that 𝜀𝑖𝑗 represents a trait barrier which dictates if there is a 
selection on a victim by a cheater species. In contrast, bij describes that a 
potential mutualism or cheating interaction cannot occur because of a large 
trait dissimilarity between partners. By incorporating bij in our model we 
explored how network structure changes through time as an outcome of the 
coevolutionary process. With this approach, in each simulation timestep, we 
verified if there were interacting species with differences in trait values higher 
than bij Following equation 11, we disconnected those interactions generating 
an interaction loss. Since we are focusing on how the network changes due to 
interaction loss, once the interaction is lost, it remains lost and cannot 
reconnect during the simulations. Thus, at the end of a simulation, we may 
have an interaction network with a different structure generated through the 
removal of links. We then compared the initial and final network structure in 
each particular simulation. 

We characterize the structure of the networks calculating two common 
measures of network structure: nestedness and modularity (Almeida-Neto et 
al. 2008, Blondel et al. 2008). For each simulation, we computed the number of 
interactions loss generated by the coevolutionary dynamics at the end of the 
simulation, F. We computed the indexes describing structural change 
between the final and initial network. We used two indexes of network 
structure change: ΔNODF (Almeida-Neto et al. 2008) and ΔQ (Blondel et al. 
2008). For each network, these measures are calculated as the difference 
between the network nestedness (NODF) and modularity (Q) at the end and 
at the beginning of the simulations: <> 

Coevolutionary dynamics, in our model, therefore, may reduce the total 
number of interactions, favoring specialization. We then explored if the 
removal of interactions by coevolutionary dynamics deviates from random 
removal of interactions from the initial network. To do so, for each 
simulation, we created a third network generated by removing F interactions 
from the initial network. This network, therefore, has the same number of 
interactions than the coevolved network but the set of interactions removed 
was randomly defined. We then compared how network structure changes 
with random loss of interactions and loss of interactions due to trait 
dissimilarity of coevolution outcomes. 

i) How do different frequencies of cheating interactions affect coevolutionary 
dynamics? 

The higher the proportion of cheating interactions, the higher the trait 
disparity observed across animal species and across plant species in the 
network (Fig. 2a-c). The effect of cheating interactions is similar for the three 
types of networks studied here, leading to increased trait disparity (Table 2). 
Thus, cheating interactions increase the trait disparity across species (Fig. 2), 
and this effect is not dependent on the structure of the ecological network. 
Following our results, we develop an analytical approximation which relates 
the importance of evolutive effects and the trait disparity of species. Both 
simulations and analytical approximation points to an increase in trait 
disparity due to cheating interactions (Supporting Information). 

We observed that cheating interactions affect the number of species 
trait clusters. At low levels of cheating interactions (p = 0.01, with p being the 
frequency of cheating interactions in the networks), we found a low number 
of clusters in simulations (2.43±0.62, Fig. 2d-f). At intermediate levels of 
cheating interactions, the number of trait clusters increased (p = 0.5, 
3.03±0.79). Finally, if most of the network is formed by cheating interactions 
then, on average, we saw the formation of lower numbers of species trait 
clusters, similar to when there is low frequency of cheating interactions (p = 
0.9, Fig. 2d-f). Thus, increasing the frequency of cheating interactions fuels 
trait disparity in mutualistic networks by promoting the emergence of trait 
clusters. However, these trait clusters disappear under higher frequencies of 
cheating interactions. 

ii) Do central cheater species amplify the effect of cheaters interactions on trait 
evolution? 

Our results do not support the prediction that highly connected species 
would have a stronger effect on trait evolution in mutualistic networks (Table 
3). In fact, there is high variability in mean trait disparity within scenarios and 
types of interactions across simulations shown by the 0.05 and 0.95 quantiles 
from our simulation results represented by the vertical bars in Fig. 3a-b. Thus, 
highly connected cheaters species do not promote higher levels of trait 
diversity than those promoted by cheating interactions distributed across the 
network in our simulations (Fig. 3a). Similarly, the number of trait clusters of 
species between scenarios are also variable (Fig. 3b). 

iii) What is the effect of cheating interactions on the structure of mutualistic 
networks? 

In our simulations, coevolutionary dynamics assuming p = 0 (no cheating 
interactions) led to almost no change in network structure [ΔQ ≅ 0; ΔNODF 
≅ 0]. As we increase the frequency of cheating interactions, mutualistic 
networks become more modular and less nested (Table 4). This increasing 
modularity and reduced nestedness observed was not reproduced by simply 
randomly removing interactions. Moreover, the increase in modularity and 
reduction in nestedness was not equally distributed across mutualisms. In 
mutualisms that the empirical network was initially very modular and not 
nested (e.g., ant-myrmecophyte networks) changes in network structure were 
weaker than in mutualisms showing higher nestedness (e.g., pollination and 
seed dispersal). Hence, empirical networks under the effect of cheaters shift 
its network structure towards high modular and low nested patterns (Table 
4). 

We explored the coevolutionary outcomes of cheating interactions in 
mutualistic networks. Our results show how trait evolution and network 
structure could change due to cheating lifestyles that emerge in mutualisms. 
Previous studies already explored the effect of mutualisms and cheating 
interactions on population dynamics (Law et al. 2001, Bronstein et al. 2003, 
Wilson et al. 2003, Lee 2015) and phenotypic evolution (Ferriere et al. 2002). In 
this context, our work contributes to further our understanding on 
coevolutionary dynamics of multispecies assemblages in three different 
ways.  

First, cheating interactions promote higher community-level trait 
disparity in mutualistic networks. By imposing selection favoring trait 
mismatching, the presence of cheating interactions leads to an increase in 
species trait disparity. This arms race dynamics partially offsets selection 
favoring convergence and trait matching in mutualisms (Guimarães et al. 
2011, Zhang et al. 2012). Therefore, cheating interactions may allow us to 
understand one of the mechanisms preventing the perfect trait matching in 
empirical mutualistic communities (Law et al. 2001); yet trait disparity cannot 
increase indefinitely due to factors related to the environmental pressures and 
distinct selection regimes (Andreazzi et al. 2017). For instance, limited genetic 
variation or limited anatomical and physiological mechanisms restricts fruit 
sugar content and flower size (Jordano 1995), which could limit the potential 
for trait matching. Also, annual variation in soil nutrients limit the pulp 
composition of fleshy fruits and, consequently, represents a restriction for the 
development of sugar-rich fruits that are be highly attractive to frugivores 
(Herrera 1998), limiting trait matching in plant-frugivore systems. 

Cheating interactions promote, in a certain frequency, trait disparity in 
mutualistic networks by generating clusters of species traits. In intermediate 
frequencies of cheating interactions, the joint effect of mutualistic selection 
favoring trait matching and cheaters interactions favoring trait mismatching 
create clusters of species traits. There is theoretical evidence that the 
proportion of positive and negative effects between species is close to 1:1 in 
real communities (Dodds 1997). Thus, it is possible that our results showing 
higher trait disparity due to the formation of trait clusters in intermediate 
levels of cheating interactions could be empirically tested. The presence of 
cheaters may be underestimated in empirical networks (Genini et al. 2010), 
partially because there is great behavioral plasticity among interacting 
individuals (Bronstein 2001). Thus, intraspecific variation generating 
behavioral plasticity may play an important role in individual fitness and lead 
to occasional cheating. This indicates that trait disparity may be higher than 
expected in mutualistic interactions and future studies would benefit from 
trait disparity measurements in empirical communities. 

Second, the centrality of a cheater species does not change the trait 
disparity pattern that results from mutualisms with cheating interactions. 
Although species centrality is one of the best measures to identify important 
species in ecological networks (Martín González et al. 2010), it is not the only 
force driving the structure and dynamics of networks. For instance, the 
distribution of mutualistic and antagonistic interactions between component 
species within a network has an impact in maintaining the network structure 
when facing perturbations (Montesinos-Navarro et al. 2017). A next step for 
our work is to explore how the position of certain cheating interactions could 
change the coevolutionary dynamics. 

Third, the presence of cheating species in mutualistic networks may 
lead to the reorganization of network patterns due to the increased trait 
dissimilarity. We found that cheating leads to increased modularity and 
reduced nestedness in mutualistic networks. The emergence of modularity 
was also observed as an outcome of coevolutionary dynamics in antagonistic 
networks and depends on the selection intensity between victim and cheater 
species (Andreazzi et al. 2017). Our results propose an alternative path to the 
emergence of modularity in mutualistic networks, which depends on how 
much cheating interactions the mutualistic networks support. The structure of 
interaction networks is explained by several factors, such as species 
abundance distribution (Dátillo et al. 2014), mismatch between traits of plants 
and animals (Stang et al. 2007) and phylogenetic and phenology-based 
constraints (Jordano 1995, Jordano et al. 2003). Here we show that cheating 
interactions could also change the structure of mutualistic networks through 
the coevolutionary process. Future studies could test the influence of cheating 
interactions in cascading co-extinctions in mutualistic networks. 

By now, our results suggest that the incorporation of the selection 
imposed by the cheating interactions that naturally emerge from mutualisms 
is pivotal to a deep understanding of the coevolutionary dynamics in species-
rich mutualisms. Cheating interactions change the outcomes of mutualistic 
coevolution, leading to increased interspecific trait variation and clustering. 
We provide insights on the effect of multiple interaction types in a network 
and how it may shape trait diversity by the contrasting selective forces 
favoring convergence and disparity across interacting species (Sauve et al. 
2016). The structure of simulated networks significantly changed when we 
increased the frequency of cheating interactions, and this result opens new 
questions on which is the balance of positive and negative effects that 
maintains the structure of empirical networks. Our theoretical predictions 
may also help us to understand how networks might evolve under a rapidly 
changing world, in which interactions are vanishing due to several 
anthropogenic impacts, with unknown consequences for ecosystem 
functioning. 
