Currently, the whole world is under the threat of the COVID-19 
pandemic, and dentists are at high risk. The aim of this study was to 
investigate what kind of precautions Turkish dentists take in dental 
clinics during the COVID-19 pandemic. The study population consisted 
of dentists in Turkey.  An online questionnaire (23 questions–57 items) 
was sent to a sample of Turkish dentists from March 16 to March 20, 
2020. The questionnaire comprised a series of questions about dentists’ 
demographic characteristics, their concerns, and the measures taken 
in dental clinics against COVID-19. This study included a total of 
1,958 Turkish dentists. A total of 1,274 (65.1%) were general dentists, 
and 684 (34.9%) were specialists. Five hundred twenty-two (26.7%) 
dentists attended an informational meeting on COVID-19. Of these 
dentists, 69.8% were aware of COVID-19 according to their self-assessed 
knowledge scores. More than 90% of the dentists were concerned about 
themselves and their families. Only 12% of the dentists wore an N95 
mask. Although Turkish dentists took some precautionary measures, 
they did not take enough precautions to protect themselves, the dental 
staff, and other patients from COVID-19. As the number of COVID-19 
cases increased, the measures taken slightly increased in dental 
clinics as well. Dentists are strongly recommended to take maximum 
precautions in the clinical setting. The guidelines about the COVID-19 
pandemic should be sent to all dentists by the regional and national 
dental associations.

The coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19) outbreak began to be observed 
for the first time in the city of Wuhan, China, and has then become a major 
public health problem not only for China, but also for other countries around 
the world,1 prompting the World Health Organization (WHO) to declare 
COVID-19 a pandemic on March 11, 2020.2 A new type of coronavirus was 
isolated on January 7, 2020, and the influenza virus, avian influenza virus, 
adenovirus, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV), 
and Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) were 
excluded as possible pathogens. This virus was initially called “new 
coronavirus” (nCoV).3 Finally, the pathogen has been called SARS-CoV-2.4

The first officially known case of COVID-19 in 
Turkey was detected on March 10, 2020. After this 
date, the number of cases has increased day by day 
according to WHO data.5

Its human-to-human transmission occurs through 
airborne droplets of respiratory secretions from an 
infected individual and through contact with an 
infected person or contaminated surface. It has not 
yet been proven that it is transmitted by blood or 
saliva. However, like in other diseases that have been 
proven to be transmitted by blood or saliva, such as 
human immunodeficiency virus infection/acquired 
immune deficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS), hepatitis 
C virus (HCV), and hepatitis B virus (HBV), it has 
been suggested 2019-nCoV could also be transmitted 
in similar ways.6

Although the average incubation period of 2019-
nCoV is estimated to be 5 to 6 days, there is some 
evidence showing that this period could be as long 
as 14 days. Despite reports indicating that it could 
extend up to 24 days, a 14-day period is the accepted 
time frame to make medical observations and put 
those who have been (potentially) exposed to the 
infection in quarantine.7

2019-nCoV can live on surfaces for a few hours 
or up to several days, depending on the type of 
surface, ambient temperature, or humidity.8 Based 
on observations, although people of all ages are 
susceptible to this infectious disease, when the modes 
of transmission of this pandemic were examined, 
it was observed that those who are in close contact 
with symptomatic/asymptomatic COVID-19 patients, 
including healthcare staff and other patients in 
hospitals, are at higher risk of acquiring this infection.9 
In particular, when working procedures in dental 
clinics are considered, the spread of this infection 
can be high among dentists and their patients.

There is an urgent need for strict and effective 
infection control protocols for dental practices and 
hospitals in countries/regions affected by COVID-19. 
There are guidelines recommended by the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the American 
Dental Association (ADA), and WHO for dentists 
and dental staff to control the spread of COVID-19.1,10

If an individual has been in pandemic regions 
in the past 14 days, quarantine is recommended for 
at least 14 days. Non-emergency dental care should 
be suspended in the regions where COVID-19 has 
spread.11 Oral emergencies are defined as oral diseases 
that rapidly occur and develop in a short time and 
require immediate treatment, such as toothache, 
dental trauma, temporomandibular joint dislocation, 
oral and maxillofacial trauma, and infection.12,13

High-speed rotary handpieces and ultrasonic 
instruments produce aerosols and droplets that 
are contaminated with body fluids (blood, saliva, 
etc.). Therefore, dentists may be contaminated with 
various pathogenic microorganisms or exposed to 
contaminated clinical settings. 2019-nCoV infection 
may also occur through direct contact between 
contaminated hands and the damaged mucosa when 
the defensive barrier is removed as a result of the fact 
that sharp tools damage the epithelial barrier of the 
mucosa and cut and pierce the mucosa.11

It is not recommended that a patient with COVID-19, 
who is in the acute febrile phase of the disease, visit a 
dental clinic. In terms of a potential risk of infection, 
the body temperature of all patients admitted to the 
dental clinic should be measured by a contact-free 
forehead thermometer in the first place, and it is 
recommended that a form with questions about the 
risk factors for a potential infection be filled out before 
directing patients to the dental chair, and patients are 
recommended to be seated in a dental chair only if all 
the parameters in this form are negative.14 Before the 
oral examination, patients can use mouthrinses such 
as povidone-iodine (1%), cetylpyridinium chloride 
(0.05%~0.10%), or mouthrinses containing essential 
oil components that can effectively reduce droplets 
and aerosols generated during dental procedures.15

COVID-19 can be transmitted by the oral-fecal 
route, which also reveals the importance of hand 
hygiene. Failure to pay maximum attention to hand 
hygiene is one of the major factors in the spread of 
the disease. Therefore, additional supplements such 
as hand sanitizers are absolutely required for dentists 
who cannot wash their hands frequently.14

Dentists are recommended to take personal 
precautions (mask, goggles, etc.) in order to protect 
themselves from the droplets/aerosols generated 
during dental procedures.9 Since the transmission 
of airborne droplet infection is considered the main 
mode of spread, especially in dental clinics and 
hospitals, protective equipment, including safety 
goggles, masks, gloves, face shields, and protective 
outerwear, is strongly recommended to dentists for 
all health care services in order to create a barrier 
against the virus.14

Nowadays, when the world struggles with the 
COVID-19 pandemic, dentists have to change their 
routine clinical attitudes and behaviors. The aim of 
this study was to investigate whether Turkish dentists 
who are actively performing their duties have made 
any possible changes in their attitudes and behaviors 
towards COVID-19 at their dental clinics before 
or during routine dental procedures and to raise 
awareness about the importance of such changes.

The study was approved by the Non-Interventional 
Clinical Research Ethics Committee of Inonu 
University, Malatya, Turkey (process 2020/592).

A new questionnaire about COVID-19 was 
developed for the study. Firstly, we carried out a 
literature search in Turkish and English and looked 
at guidelines by using the keywords “COVID-19”, 
“Coronavirus”, “dentistry”, and “dental treatment”.
Then, a questionnaire, consisting of 22 questions 
(56 items), was compiled from the relevant sources. 
Google forms were used to create the questionnaire.

The content adequacy of the questionnaire 
was examined by experts to assess how clear the 
wording of the items was prior to the main study. 
The questions were sent to five experts (two pediatric 
dentists, one periodontist, one general dentist, and one 
biostatistician). Based on the comments made by these 
experts, one question was added. Then, the final 23 
questions (57 items) were tested by two experts (one 
pediatric dentist and one general dentist) to check 
whether the questions were understandable and 
consistent with the conceptual framework. Finally, 
the questionnaire was sent to a Turkish language 
expert for validation, and the questionnaire was 
concluded in this stage.

The final online questionnaire was sent to all 
dentists in Turkey whose contact information had 
been provided by email, WhatsApp, and private 
social networking platforms, such as Facebook, 
Instagram, etc. In addition, the questionnaire was 
distributed via Facebook to groups that are currently 
very active online forums for dentists in Turkey. 
A total of 1,958 Turkish dentists, all volunteers, 
answered the questionnaire. The number of volunteer 
dentists participating in the survey was larger 
than the required sample size (see details below) 
calculated for this study. The calculated sample 
size was determined proportionally based on the 
number of dentists in each specialty area in Turkey. 
The survey data were collected from March 16 to 
March 20, 2020.

The power analysis estimated that surveys 
with 1,454 or more individuals needed to have 
a 98% confidence interval, a population size of 
40,429 individuals, with the real value within 
±3% of the surveyed value. However, in order to 
increase the reliability of the findings of this study, 
1,958 individuals who answered the web-based 
questionnaire during the survey application period 
were included. Based on the stratified random 
sampling method, the minimum number required for 
each specialty area was determined by considering 
the targeted sample size.

The data were expressed as mean and standard 
deviation or frequency with percentage values for 
overall variables. Proportions were compared by the 
z-test, whenever appropriate. Pairwise comparisons of 
the proportions were made using Bonferroni’s method. 
P<0.05 values were considered to be significant. IBM 
SPSS Statistics for Windows, version 26.0, was used 
for the statistical analyses.

A multilayer perceptron (MLP) artificial neural 
network (ANN) model was constructed to associate 
the dentists’ self-assessed COVID-19 knowledge score 
(target variable) with the related variables such as the 
questions in the survey and the date on which the 
questionnaire was filled out (input variables). The 
whole data were randomly divided into a training 
dataset (70%) and testing dataset (30%), respectively. 
The importance values for the input variables were 
calculated by using the MLP ANN model and ranked 
in descending order.

The mean age of the 1,958 participants was 
32.5±23.5 (20–74) years, 70% were female, 53.3% were 
single, 67.7% were living with an immediate family 
member, 5.7% were living with an extended family 
member, 21.9% were living alone, and 33.9% had a 
child/children. In addition, 3.3% of the participants 
had traveled abroad in the past month, 18.2% had had 
face-to-face contact with someone who had traveled 
abroad in the past month, and  33.9% presented with 
some medical problem.

Regarding dental specialties, 65.1% were general 
dentists, 3.8% were maxillofacial surgeons, 5.2% were 
endodontists, 2% were oral diagnosis and radiology 
specialists, 3.4% were orthodontists, 10.3% were 
pediatric dentists, 4.3% were prosthodontists, 3.6% 
were periodontists, and  2.3% were restorative dentistry 
specialists. The survey response rates by Turkish general 
dentists and specialists were 3.7%, 7.6%, 14.7%, 9.8%, 
5.5%, 28%, 8.2%, 9%, and 8.3%, respectively.

Of the study participants, 29.8% were working in a 
private hospital/clinic, 43.6% were working in a public 
hospital, and 26.6% were working in a university.
The dentists’ self-assessed COVID-19 knowledge 
scores from 1 to 5 were 59.2%, 15.3%, 8.8%, 9.9%, and 
6.8%, respectively.

Most of the dentists answered “Yes” to three 
questions (Q20, Q21, and Q22) (Table 1).

When asked about the source of information about 
COVID-19, 96.27% answered that they received this 
information from “physicians’ personal websites/social 
media accounts”.  This answer had the highest percentage 
compared to others. Only 26.65% of the dentists attended 
an informational meeting on COVID-19.

The distribution of the participants’ answers to 
some questions – Q12, Q13, Q14, Q15, Q16, Q19, and 
Q23 – is presented in Table 2.

The percentage distributions of the answers 
regarding the changes made by dentists and 
institutions for patient admission during the 5-day 
data collection are shown in Table 3.

The importance levels of the related variables, 
such as the questions in the survey and the date 
on which the questionnaire was filled out, for the 
dentists’ self-assessed COVID-19 knowledge score, 
according to the MLP ANN model, are presented in 
Table 4. The question with the highest importance 
level was “As a dentist, do you inform your patients 
about COVID-19?” (15.39%), whereas the variable 
with the lowest importance level was “marital status” 
(0.03%) (Table 4).

According to the WHO-Global Dashboard,5 
the total number of confirmed cases/new cases of 
COVID-19 for 16-20 March 2020, when this survey 
was conducted, is presented in Table 5.

This survey study raises awareness about taking 
the necessary measures as soon as possible and 
provides insight into whether dentists in Turkey have 
made any changes in their routine dental treatment 
practices since the COVID-19 pandemic started to 
spread in our country in March 2020.

The first officially known case of COVID-19 in 
Turkey was detected on March 10, 2020, and this 
study was carried out using the web-based survey 
designed between March 16 and 20, 2020. There 
was an increase in the number of confirmed cases 
on these dates.

Even though data collection was limited to 5 
days, participation in the survey was quite high. 
More participants than the minimum sample size 
calculated for the study (n = 1,454) were included 
(n=1,958) so that the validity and reliability of the 
obtained results could be increased. This study reflects 
the dentists’ attitudes and behaviors throughout 
Turkey since it included the sample size calculated 
using power analysis. Although participation in the 
survey required volunteering, participation in the 
survey was quite high, possibly due to the fact that 
COVID-19 is a current issue and dentists are worried 
about and interested in this infection as they do not 
know exactly how they should act or behave towards it.

According to some variables investigated in this 
study (sociodemographic status, medical status, 
traveling abroad, the score of dentists’ self-assessed 
knowledge, shown in Table 1), the percentage of 
professionals psychologically affected by COVID-19 
was generally over 80%. Psychological distress was 
described by 67.6% of maxillofacial surgeons and 
78.2% of general dentists. Psychological distress 
increased as the level of knowledge about COVID-19 
increased, ranging from 55.6% to 81.5%.

According to the variables discussed in Table 1, 
while the percentage of dentists who were concerned 
about getting infected with COVID-19 was over 90%, 
the percentage of those who were concerned about 
carrying this virus to their families was over 95%, 
which means that dentists were very concerned about 
themselves and their families. It is quite normal for 
dentists to be concerned about getting infected with 
2019-nCoV and transmitting it to those around them. 
In a recent clinical study, 29% of 138 hospitalized 
patients with 2019-nCoV-infected pneumonia in 
Wuhan, China, were healthcare team members.16

The dentists reported that they had access to 
information about COVID-19 mostly from “physicians’ 
personal websites/social media accounts (96.27%)” 
and from “the websites of official entities such as 
the Ministry of Health, WHO, and professional 
organizations, and/or their social media accounts 
(91.37%)”. In order to be able to control the spread of 
COVID-19, it is extremely important that the sources 
from which physicians can obtain the necessary 
information be reliable and informative enough 
to enable them to assess the situations they often 
encounter professionally with regard to COVID-19. 
For the most accurate and reliable information, 
dental professionals should only access the websites 
of official organizations.

Unfortunately, the percentage of Turkish dentists 
who attended informational meetings on COVID-19 
was 26.65%, which is too low for dentists who are at 
high risk of COVID-19. The number of these meetings 
should be increased, and participation in meetings 
should be mandatory for dentists.

Coronaviruses can persist on inanimate surfaces 
such as metal, glass, or plastic for up to 9 days, but 
they can be efficiently inactivated by using surface 
disinfection products with 62–71% ethanol, 0.5% 
hydrogen peroxide, or 0.1% sodium hypochlorite 
within 1 minute.17 If soap and water are not available 
and hands are not visibly dirty, an alcohol-based 
hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol can 
be used. However, if hands are visibly dirty, they 
should always be washed with soap and water.18

In this study, “frequent hand washing (98.57%)” and 
“no handshaking/no embracing/no kissing (92.13%)” 
were the most important measures against COVID-19 
taken by dentists in their daily lives. Professional 
measures included “more frequent hand washing 
(96.88%)”, “wearing gloves (96.58%)”, and “wearing 
a mask (85.90%)”. Wearing an N95 mask was one 
of the measures taken at least by 12.36%. This low 
rate could be due to the limited number of these 
masks and to their high cost throughout the country. 
Khader et al.19 indicated that 92.9% of dentists wore 
personal protective equipment such as masks, gloves, 
and goggles, and 96.2% of them frequently cleaned 
their hands by using alcohol-based sanitizers and 
soap and water. Furthermore, they reported that, 
although Jordanian dentists were aware of COVID-19 
symptoms, its mode of transmission, infection control, 
and measures in dental clinics, they had limited 
comprehension of additional precautionary measures 
for protection of the dental staff and patients from 
COVID-19. However, there were no “local” cases in 
Jordan at the time of data collection.

When the working conditions of dentists are 
considered, they should always use personal 
protective equipment in dental clinics. However, 
dentists who are at high risk of COVID-19 have to 
take other measures during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Samaranayake et al.20 indicated that rubber dam 
and strong saliva ejectors minimized aerosol or 
droplets during dental treatments. Furthermore, 
face shields/goggles should be worn to prevent the 
splashing or spattering of blood, saliva, and water 
droplets during treatment. It should not be forgotten 
that all dental professionals who continue to work 
during the pandemic are at high risk of COVID-19.

In this study, while 63.79% of Turkish dentists used 
strong dental suction during dental procedures, 49.95% 
avoided performing aerosol-forming procedures as 
much as possible. Among those dentists who started 
the treatment with a pre-procedural mouthrinse, 
36.47% used 0.2% povidone (Batticon) and 10.32% used 
chlorhexidine. As instructed by the Guideline for the 
Diagnosis and Treatment of Novel Coronavirus-Infected 
Pneumonia (5th edition) released by the National Health 
Commission of the People’s Republic of China, it was 
reported that chlorhexidine, which is commonly used 
in dental practice, had no effect against COVID-19. 
Instead, mouthrinses containing oxidative agents such 
as 1% hydrogen peroxide or 0.2% povidone should be 
preferred.14 ADA and CDC only recommend peroxide 
to destroy the virus.21,22

It is now confirmed that COVID-19 is transmitted 
through human contact and in the form of droplets, but 
airborne transmission has not been ruled out.23,24 Since 
the end of January 2020, it has been recommended 
that the Chinese avoid crowded places, including 
hospitals and dental clinics, as much as possible, to 
guard against cross-infection as a result of the rapid 
transmission of COVID-19.

COVID-19 spreads among people who are in close 
contact (within about 6 feet) with each other. The 
spread happens when an infected person coughs, 
sneezes, or talks, and droplets from their mouth/nose 
are released into the air and land in the mouths/ noses 
of people nearby, or the droplets are inhaled. It is a 
known fact that people who are infected but do not 
have symptoms are also likely to play a role in the 
spread of COVID-19. People can spread the virus before 
they know they are sick. Therefore, it is important to 
stay away from other people, even if they do not have 
any symptoms. Social distancing helps limit contact 
with infected people and contaminated surfaces. 
Social/physical distancing means a person should keep 
space between him/herself and other people outside 
the home. To practice social or physical distancing, 
a distance of at least 6 feet (2 meters) should be kept 
between people, and mass gatherings and gathering 
in groups should be avoided. Social distancing is 
especially important for people who are at higher 
risk because of their health conditions.25

In the literature, it has been indicated that many 
dental procedures have the potential to spread bacteria 
and viruses to the dental staff and other people in 
dental clinics.26 Health officials in some cities of China 
have ordered dental institutions to suspend all general 
non-emergency dental treatments, except emergency 
dental services. These policies have deterred patients 
from receiving dental care unless it is an emergency.23 
Similarly, in Turkey, on the second day of the data 
collection in our study, the Turkish Ministry of Health 
and the Turkish Dental Association suggested that only 
emergency dental patients should be admitted during 
this process (March 17, 2020). Guo et al.23 reported that 
94.6% of the dental visits during the COVID-19 epidemic 
were for emergency treatments. During this 5-day 
period, from the first day of data collection to the last 
day, physicians and health institutions significantly 
reduced patient admissions and mostly admitted 
emergency dental patients. The percentage of dentists 
who reported no changes in patient admissions in their 
institutions was 50.4%, 28.4%, 10.5%, 5.2%, and 5.2%, 
respectively, from day 1 to day 5. The main reasons for 
this decrease were the results of the measures taken 
by dentists and authorities against the COVID-19 
pandemic in view of the growing number of cases, 
and the instructions and controls recommended by 
CDC, ADA, WHO, the Turkish Ministry of Health, and 
Turkish Dental Association to dentists and dental staff.

Turkish dentists are mostly concerned about the lack 
of awareness of patients because of the problems they 
had in their workplace (41.30%) during the COVID-19 
pandemic. Among the dentists, 82.94% stated that 
they informed their patients about the COVID-19 
pandemic, probably due to the low level of COVID-19 
awareness among the patients. Khader et al.19 reported 
that the vast majority of dentists (97.8%) thought that 
it was important to educate people about COVID-19 to 
prevent its spread. In addition, Turkish dentists (21.85%) 
reported that they had difficulties reaching protective 
equipment (mask, shield, etc.) during the COVID-19 
pandemic. Unfortunately, this has become a common 
problem for many countries in the world owing to the 
increasing demand for protective equipment and the 
increasing number of cases. The number of companies 
that manufacture protective equipment all over the 
world should be urgently increased, and the prices of 
these products should be reduced.

The major limitation of this study is that it is not 
known whether the dentists who participated in 
the study were infected with COVID-19. Whether 
there is a difference between dentists taking and 
not taking measures against COVID-19 could not 
be proven with concrete evidence. It would not be 
possible to contact the same participants for further 
studies since the participants’ personal information 
was not recorded in this study.

The results of the survey conducted in this study 
reveal that, although Turkish dentists have increased 
protective measures against the COVID-19 pandemic, 
they have not reached sufficient levels yet in terms 
of attitudes and behaviors. However, further studies 
with a much larger sample size and longer follow-up 
period are needed to achieve more precise results. In 
addition, the prevalence of Turkish dentists infected 
by COVID-19 is definitely an issue to be investigated.

The authors wish to thank all participants for their 
invaluable contribution to this study. The authors express 
their deepest gratitude to all the healthcare professionals 
who contributed to the fight against COVID-19 and 
also dedicate this paper to all the Turkish healthcare 
workers who lost their lives because of COVID-19.
