It is widely known that effective readers are those who have appropriately developed reading skills. 
If those skills are not developed, the readers will not achieve the levels of perception needed to 
solve problems or pass academic tests, neither in their mother tongue nor in a foreign language. 
For this reason, it is imperative to find the right strategies to enhance reading comprehension in 
English as Foreign Language (EFL) learners. One of those strategies is the use of graphic 
organizers, and this study aimed to measure the extent to which it influences the development of 
reading comprehension of Unidad Educativa Joaquin Lalama students, in Ambato-Ecuador. 40 
students in the control group and 35 students in the experimental group constituted the sample.  
The data was collected through the observation technique and the comparison of results from a 
reading comprehension pre-test and post-test. Finally, this study found the use of graphic 
organizers to be effective for developing reading comprehension in the subjects observed. 

Undoubtedly, English has become an important language that is currently used for communication 
in the scientific, technological, political, and the economic field. This language has also been 
globally spread through entertainment. In fact, as estimated years ago, the number of learners of 
English as a foreign language would continue to grow, at least in China and India (Graddol 
2006:168).  

Similarly, in Ecuador, English is probably considered the most important foreign language, a 
lingua franca, including by indigenous communities such as Yungantza, whose members have 
shown an interest in learning this foreign language due to the expectations for better academic and 
employment opportunities (Sánchez & Zajkowski  2016:2).  

As it can be understood from this particular example, being proficient in English has been 
associated with better job opportunities and overall knowledge, particularly because the most 
recent scientific and academic information is found in English. Consequently, for several years 
now, the Ecuadorian Education System has given EFL teaching a significant importance, making 
the English Subject a meaningful part of the curriculum in primary school and high schools. 

Learning a new language definitely involves many skills or capabilities to understand and express 
effectively. The four main language skills are Listening, Speaking, Reading and Writing. In our 
country, a place where there is no immersion and English is a foreign language rather than a second 
one, teachers need to be inventive and try to use authentic elements, given that their input might 
be the only one received by students in their learning process (Bekes 2016).  

Spratt, Pulverness and Williams, have emphasized the characteristics of reading as a receptive 
skill, which means that this activity involves reacting to a text rather than creating one (Spratt, 
Pulverness & Williams 2005:21-26). Reading comprehension is a complex cognitive process of 
decoding symbols to obtain meaning. It comprises the comprehension of a text at a word level, 
and at a sentence and paragraph level, as well. In order to help learners, teachers must have a clear 
understanding of the complexity of reading and try to find ways to ease such a complex process. 
Years ago, UNESCO pointed out that third grade students from some Latin American countries, 
including Ecuador, are not able to recognize important information in simple texts in Spanish 
(López 2009:1-3). Again, the information is confirmed in 2016 when third graders from schools 
in Ecuador, Guatemala, Honduras, Dominican Republic, among others, still showed low 
performance in reading, not being able to identify key information unless explicitly stated and 
highlighted in a text.  

Similar results were found especially in public high schools when the standard of the English 
language was evaluated in Ecuador. Common issues such as class size, the need to train teachers 
more and even an actual shortage of teachers appeared in the teaching-learning process that might 
affect it negatively. The truth is that, despite the efforts made in the EFL classroom, student’s 
performance seems to be rather low.  

For instance, high schoolers who attend Unidad Educativa Joaquin Lalama have showed to feel 
demotivated when reading in either Spanish or English due to the lack of the strategies needed to 
understand texts effectively. Thus, how can we help students become readers that are more 
effective? Are we using the right strategies when we teach reading? Worldwide, teachers are 
probably wondering the same and exploring different options; for example, Wong (2019) 
implemented a 14-week syllabus that incorporated practice on recognizing discourse structures 
and using graphic organizers in an EFL class.  

Although this researcher concludes that further study about the benefits of graphic organizers in 
foreign language teaching context is needed, others affirm that using graphic organizers can 
improve students' reading skills because they develop the necessary cognitive abilities for 
understanding learning materials containing interesting graphics (Kurniaman, Oktari & Pahrurazi  
2019).  

Based on a theoretical perspective, this study proposed graphic organizers as tools to be used for 
the enhancement of reading comprehension in junior year students at Unidad Educativa Joaquin 
Lalama in the Academic Year 2018-2019.   

One of the investigators of this study is currently working at Unidad Educativa Joaquin Lalama 
and obtained the permission from its authorities to carry out this research, trying to find a way to 
help students improve their reading comprehension in English. Consequently, the groups assigned 
to the researcher in the academic period 2018-2019, before and after intervention, were observed.  
Barreiro and Albandoz (2001) have defined population as the total amount of individuals studied 
in a problem. Since the total number of students in this research was less than 100, the population 
and sample will be considered as one, making up a control group of 40 students, and an 
experimental group of 35. 

This research work was based on a quasi-experimental design and it is a nonequivalent group 
design, which means that a pretest and a post-test will be needed to compare two groups: one 
treated and the comparison one. In this type of research, the independent variable is manipulated 
and participants are not randomly assigned to conditions.  

Such practice is normally found in naturalistic environments and the evaluation of social work 
practice (Thyer 2012:77-106). Some of the characteristics of this work result from the combination 
of qualitative and quantitative methods that study the character of prospective educational reality 
(Marzano, Vegliate & De Angelis 2015:406).  

Graphic organizers are used to help the readers comprehend content of a text and their use has 
been studied scientifically for over three decades (Wills & Ellis 2008:1).  In fact, they are defined 
as a "visual representation of information in a text" that can be used with learners as an aid to 
develop reading comprehension (Jiang & Grabe 2007:34). 

A pre and a post reading comprehension test were designed to compare the results before and after 
an intervention that lasted 6 weeks. Varied aspects were observed in the instruments created for 
this research, as it can be seen in table N. 1. 

During the intervention period, teachers guided students through the use and familiarization with 
different graphic organizers that were considered appropriate for each reading text. The reading 
material was selected taking into account the age and interest of the group in order to engage 
students. Every time new graphic organizers were presented to the experimental group, the teacher 
highlighted their purpose and how to use them; whereas the control group continued working with 
reading activities, as they usually had been doing. 

Graphic Organizers for reading fall into the category of Graphic Strategies. Although there is a 
large amount of them, the most common ones are concept maps, mind maps, webs and Venn 
diagrams. Based on previous studies and their practicality, the following graphic organizers were 
chosen for the study: K-W-L chart (know, want to know, learned); K-W-L-S chart (know, want, 
learned, still); BRS chart (building and revising know schema chart; Sixty second Skim and Scan; 
Cluster web; Concept web; Alphabet brainstorming; Questioning cluster and B-D-A connection 
chart (before, during and after reading). Some can be seen in figure 1: 

A mixed method, an assessment questionnaire and a short interview were used as instruments that, 
along with rubrics, measured students’ knowledge about the texts. Finally, the data obtained was 
collected and analyzed by using statistical methods with the following variables and hypothesis: 
Independent variable: Graphic Organizers. 

Dependent variable: Reading Comprehension. 

Null Hypothesis (H0): Using graphic organizers do not affect students’ reading comprehension 
development. 

Alternative Hypothesis (H1): Using graphic organizers do affect students’ reading comprehension 
development.  

After identifying, the weakness students have when reading texts in English and having reviewed 
information about some strategies and their effectiveness, this research aimed to measure the 
benefits of using graphic organizers to improve EFL reading comprehension. In order to do this, 
graphic organizers were used in the three different stages: pre, during and post reading stages. 

Both English learners and non-learners feel that English is a tool for increasing employability, 
and 59    per cent of non-learners would study the language to improve their career prospects; 
English learners also emphasize the importance of English for communicating with others.  
(British Council 2015: 8) 

Acknowledging the importance of obtaining the English language proficiency, since 2012, special 
attention has been given to this foreign language in the educational field. As a result, English 
teachers in all the country are encouraged to use innovative and appropriate ways to teach this 
language in order to obtain positive results that would place the country and its people on a more 
international stage.  

It has to be kept in mind that Ecuadorian teachers face heterogeneous classes where they have to 
teach students with different cultural backgrounds and different learning styles, which makes 
planning a lesson that would reach everyone, rather challenging. Teachers need to offer students 
different opportunities to engage in meaningful tasks where higher order thinking skills and 
problem solving abilities can be developed in real contexts, for this reason innovating our way to 
teach reading showed to have a great impact that could lead to obtaining the desired results in EFL. 

As mentioned before, Latin American countries generally have low reading levels. This has caught 
the attention of the Ecuadorian government that has tried to come up with ideas to foster reading 
and improve the levels of comprehension of texts in our country. One of those ideas is Fiesta de la 
Lectura, which is a national plan that proposes a 30-minute period during class in specific days, 
which is dedicated to promote reading in schools addressing issues and combining reading with 
recreational activities (Ministerio de Educación 2018).  

In the same tenor, other Latin American countries have also adopted this type of strategies to 
promote reading, such as Playing with Magic Words, in Bolivia, Read Together - Learn Together 
in Peru, Extracurricular Clubs in Mexico, and The magic of Reading in Guatemala, showing good 
results (Save the Children 2015).  

However, low reading comprehension may seem to be linked to the lack of reading strategies, and 
consequently, there is little acquisition of vocabulary. If this is what our students face in their first 
language (L1), it is only reasonable to think that the reading process is more complex for them in 
English. As expected, low percentages were found in the pre-test used, as it can be seen in table 
N.2:   

Table N.2 shows that both groups seem to lack proper reading skills such as using their own words 
to interpret content, adding new ideas or predicting and giving opinions or establishing connections 
in the information presented. This was observed through the analysis of the results existing in some 
of the questions specifically formulated to measure those skills (control group 3,92 points and 4,22 
points the experimental one). It can also be seen that there is a noticeable improvement in the 
experimental group that obtained 7,02 out of 10 in the post-test, which means the proposal to use 
graphic organizers to enhance reading was effective, agreeing that graphic organizers are useful 
when trying to understand information (Graves & Graves 2003). 

Locally, Tirado (2013) implemented a study about the use of active techniques to enhance reading 
comprehension in fifth year English learners in a primary school. In this study, it was found that 
the application of traditional techniques discourages students when reading; however, children 
also showed interest in learning to read better. That study, among others, has inspired teachers to 
find ways to provide EFL learners with proper strategies to read better.  
Since graphic organizers are tools that facilitate the organization or information or the 
establishment of relationships between elements of a text such as facts, examples, definitions, 
sequences, among others, their use allows the readers break down the content of the reading while 
they think about the information they are getting from the text. Using them, definitely improved 
the levels of reading comprehension in the experimental group, as it can be observed in table N. 3. 

From the observation and the comparison of the low results obtained in the pre-test: 4,05 for the 
control group and 4,14 out of 10 points for the experimental group, it can be said that students are 
demotivated when reading because they lack tools that allow them to comprehend a text. This 
information was used to propose the use of graphic organizers to enhance their reading 
comprehension.  

After the intervention, the experimental group showed a significant improvement in their scores 
(7.06). This clearly shows that using graphic organizers helped students in their reading 
comprehension tasks, turning them into more effective readers. Reading comprehension needs to 
be developed through the analysis and synthesis of information, and visual help provided by 
graphic organizers is definitely important in that process too. (Pearson & Fielding, 1991). 
From the educational point of view, there are some approaches and cognitive processes that 
support the use of graphic organizers, especially those related to Bloom´s taxonomy. When these 
tools are to be used, it must be remembered how they are linked to the different stages or levels of 
thinking.  

Using a simple flow chart can be used to remember or understand information; however, for 
application and analysis students should be required to use different graphic organizers to compare 
and contrast information, or organizers to evaluate cause and effect, positive and negative sides of 
something if the highest level of thinking is the aim. 

Graphic organizers are also useful when trying to reach students’ different learning styles. They 
are perfect for visual learners because they train readers to understand symbols and key words, 
and on top of that, they are a varied and interesting way of learning. Research has shown that 
graphic organizers are useful not only as preparation activities, but also as follow up learning tasks 
(Dishner, Bean, & Readence, 1981).  

With graphic organizers, readers can separate key information from the rest of the content; use 
strategic learning and improve other skills related to writing, reading, communication, analysis 
and creativity, fostering better overall performance, as can be perceived from the results obtained 
in the assessment of learning skills presented in Table N. 4. 

During the evaluation of learning skills, students from the control group obtained 4,05 and the 
experimental group 4,17 in the pre-test, which suggested that students’ learning skills such as 
decoding and understanding new vocabulary are rather poor. After implementing the use of 
graphic organizers to enhance reading comprehension, there was no significant change in the 
results obtained by the control group. Actually, results slightly decreased.  
Table 4 also shows that results were better for the experimental group in the post-test: 6,57 out of 
10, which means that graphic organizers also influenced positively the development of learning 
skills. 

How did graphic organizers help the readers? As it was mentioned before, graphic organizers that 
are used in reading belong to the category of Graphic Strategies. Shabiralyani, Hasan, Hamad and 
Iqbal (2015) relate visual aids and education, stating that visual aids are important because they 
disseminate knowledge and make teaching more effective.  

Additionally, Pearson and Fielding (1991) indicate that 75 percent of all information is processed 
from visual formats by the brain: images, diagrams, flowcharts, video, graphs, cartoons, coloring 
books movies, posters, games and flash cards. Undoubtedly, all the different ways of graphic 
strategies support teacher and students’ interaction.  

The present research work collected and analyzed the information from two groups: the 
experimental and the control one. Graphic organizers were used as a strategy to help students 
enhance reading comprehension, formulating the following hypothesis: 

- Using graphic organizers do not affect student`s reading comprehension development (Ho) 

- Using graphic organizers do affect student`s reading comprehension development (H1) 

Since the quasi-experimental approach was selected, there was two different measurements, one 
with a pre-test (before intervention) and one with a post-test (after the intervention).  
The selected level of significance for this social science research was α = 0.05 and a risk of 5% is 
assumed, making the confidence level equals to 95%.  

More than 30 subjects made up the sample; therefore, Kolmogorov-Smirnov test is recommended 
for this kind of study.  

The estimation of P Value was also made, as shown below in table 5. 

As it can be evidenced in the table above in the Wilconxon test for pretest and posttest on each 
criteria, the following results can be observed beginning with the experimental group: Reading 
Comprehension Z= -5,131 (a) with a p=0,000. 

The control group results as following: Reading Comprehension Z= -4,292 (a) with a p=0,000. 
Keeping in mind that Z values are negative and p values are less than 0,05, it can be deduced that 
the results obtained in the pre-test and post-test in the experimental and control groups present 
significant differences. Therefore, it can be stated that the use of graphic organizers to enhance 
students reading comprehension is effective. Although both groups present considerable 
differences, we cannot affirm that the improvement presented in reading comprehension is due 
only to the use of this strategy. 

This research proposed to measure the extent to which the use of graphic organizers influences the 
development of reading comprehension of junior year students at Unidad Educativa Joaquin 
Lalama in Ambato-Ecuador.  

After analyzing the low level of reading proficiency that students had at the beginning of this 
research, as well as the improvement of reading comprehension obtained by the experimental 
group in the post-intervention test, it can be said that the use of graphic organizers strengthened 
reading comprehension in the students in this research work. 

Following the implementation of reading activities with graphic organizers during 6 weeks, most 
of the students in the experimental group demonstrated acceptance and comprehension of how 
these tools are used. They also showed significant improvement in the development of their 
receptive skills, such as listening and concentration, their reading comprehension and their 
learning skills, for example decoding and understanding vocabulary and relating content to 
previous knowledge.   

Although both groups presented important differences in the results obtained after intervention, it 
cannot be statistically guaranteed that the improvement in the post-test from the experimental 
group is solely due to this strategy, which is why further research in the topic is recommended, if 
possible, for a longer period to confirm the usefulness of the proposal.  

In fact, other aspects need to be taken into account, such as the selection of texts. It must be 
remembered that readers who struggle with the comprehension of a text, lose interest and 
motivation (Hansen, 2016). For this reason, students’ interests and preferences need to be 
discovered when teaching reading.  

It is also advisable, although there is normally time limitation, to assess the level of reading 
comprehension students have in their mother tongue so that teachers could provide them with 
strategies that can be transferable into their foreign language learning. Supporting this, (Cheryl 
1994) stated that there is evidence of reading skills transfer from one language into another.  
Since the findings in this work suggested that there is very little or maybe no use of graphic 
organizers in EFL classrooms to develop reading skills and comprehension, it is suggested to 
inform teachers about the benefits that can be obtained from this proposal. 

The effectiveness of graphic organizers for improving reading comprehension in the EFL 
classrooms has been proven. They provide students with visual tools such as images, which expand 
the development of linguistic data or logogens in such a way, that the information is dually coded: 
visually and linguistically. This helps students process and remember content. 

Using graphic organizers for reading comprehension enhancement is a good alternative to the 
traditional methods that usually involve the activities suggested in textbooks. Therefore, the 
researchers made a proposal after the study: a selection of graphic organizers and activities that 
can help other EFL teachers and their students organize information found in texts during reading 
lessons.  

Motivating reading with innovative ways of teaching this skill, such as the use of graphic 
organizers, is definitely encouraged because being an effective reader does not only help in daily 
activities, texts comprehension in L1 and texts comprehension in English. It also develops other 
important cognitive skills and increases students’ motivation as a result of improved vocabulary 
knowledge and better texts comprehension.  
