Amid the urgency to solve countless and severe health problems, asking what is health or who can
and must have it may seem like a waste of time. However, some responses can reveal prevailing
practices that divert attention from fundamental problems, thus maintaining privileges and deepening
health  inequities.  One  Health  of  Peripheries  arises  from  these  questions  and  takes  three
interdependent  senses. The first refers to attributes determining the well-being and suffering of
peripheral multispecies collectives: a state, a process, the realization of capacities. The second
problematizes marginalizing apparatuses that define health and who can and should have it. The third
encompasses practices in more-than-human social spaces in which, and through which, One Health is
experienced, understood, and transformed. The qualification of health as “one” does not refer to the
lack  of  plurality,  nor  to  the  simple  aggregation  of  health  fragments  (human  +  animal  +
environmental), but to the complexity  of health in a  field with peripheral places, ensuing from
margins to privilege those who are inside and legitimize the exploitation of those who are outside.
The  interaction among  margins  creates  degrees  and  kinds  of  privilege  and  vulnerability  that
materialize epidemiologic profiles while articulating different peripheral strengths and needs supports
a collective resistance to break margins. Social determination, a key concept in the (Latin American)
collective health movement, underlies such profiles. However, this movement overlooks the more-
than-human dimension of social determination; that is to say, One Health of Peripheries is a blind
spot of collective health. The cartography of One Health of Peripheries has unique needs regarding
participation, research, and inclusive policies for the decolonial promotion of healthy lifestyles.

What is health, who can be healthy, and what are the most pressing health issues? I will argue that
prevailing answers so far have been biased by struggle, cooperation, and imposition to shape and
legitimize hierarchies according to the interest of the most privileged hierarchical positions.
Conceptual frameworks about the social determination of health (1,2) and the social determinants of
health (3) consider social hierarchies, giving us insights and tools to oppose specific health inequities.
However, one of my claims in this paper is that at the same time, these frameworks ignore and
reproduce some marginalizing apparatuses that materialize more-than-human health inequities.
Drawing from Foucault (4) and Agamben (5), I take as apparatus the system of relations between
discursive practices, institutions, and more generally,  anything with the capacity to determine,
control, model, or administer living beings. By marginalizing apparatuses, I mean those that establish
margins and legitimize the exploitation and violence against living beings at the other side of the
margins, attributing to them and their interests less value while silencing their resistance and agency.
Peripheries are beyond the margins. Patriarchy margins create gender peripheries, just as species
margins produce species peripheries. The same happens with racial, ethnic, and geographic margins,
among others.

The (Latin American) collective health field  (6,7) has been concerned with some peripheries but
systematically reproduces and produces apparatuses that marginalize nonhuman animals (hereafter
animals). In collective health, animals have instrumental value to prevent and control specific human
health problems. However, they do not figure as health bearers or in any other explicit form in its
conceptual frameworks about the social determination of health. Although such marginalization is
common to different health perspectives, I will focus my critic on the collective health field because
it is one of the main influences on One Health of Peripheries.

Is the marginalization of animals from the field of collective health justified? I will conclude that it is
not. The bourdieusian’s approach that supports this field (6) and critical analysis of social hierarchies
(8) also  shows,  together  with  other  perspectives,  the  more-than-human  dimension  of  social
entanglements (9–12). Moreover, concerns with health inequities can be better addressed considering
theories  of  multispecies  justice  (13),  while  labor  perspectives  of  health  [see  Almeida-Filho’s
discussion about Laurell’s works (14)] could be updated by more-than-human labor theories (15).

Health is not exclusively human, as demonstrated by the overwhelming One Health scientific
evidence  about  the  human-animal-environment  interface  (16).  One  Health  is  supported  by
intersectoral and international initiatives due to its pertinence to address pandemics, bioterrorism,
food-borne diseases, and  significant health problems expected to worsen, such as antimicrobial
resistance  (16,17). However, One Health approaches often omit social processes from empirical
analysis and theoretical explanations. They encourage intersectoral collaboration as if it were a
matter of symmetrical negotiation between institutions, or even more problematic, a matter of global
North assistance for the global South (18).

The biologism in One Health has remarkable exceptions (19–25). Here I propose another one: One
Health of Peripheries. I rethink One Health from the perspective of Latin American collective health,
more-than-human  biopolitics,  and  other  critical  approaches.  Inevitably,  this  brings  together
contradictions and some incommensurable aspects. However, we must embrace these challenges
instead of assuming that we can translate convenient solutions for ideal settings to a real-world full of
contradictions and power relationships, far from being a coordinated network of rational actors.

The epistemologies of the South offer us alternatives such as the ecology of knowledge (26) and
hybrid  cultures  (27), among others, to think  complexity,  contradiction,  plural knowledge, and
intercultural translation. That said, my objective here is not to make remarkable advancements in
epistemic translation. Instead, in this paper, I point to some conceptual tools that help to identify
peripheries and break margins. It is a starting point to introduce One Health of Peripheries, its social
determination, and an explicit commitment to advance structural alternatives for multispecies justice.

In a separate paper, we elaborate more on the ecology of knowledge, the decolonial stance of One
Health  of  Peripheries,  and  seven  actions  to  promote  the  health  of  marginalized  multispecies
collectives (18).

The following sections of the paper sketch the emerging field of One Health of Peripheries. A field
requiring new practices and policies as well as including other actions already existing but applied
elsewhere. Notwithstanding the relevance, my objective here is not to address specific procedures to
conduct health practices or concrete recommendations to guide health policies. The  more-than-
human biopolitics  section locates marginalizing apparatuses in a broader biopolitical field. It then
outlines the role of domestication and animalization in the establishment and operation of hierarchies
that determine epidemiologic profiles; it also elaborates on the intersection of margins as well as on
possibilities of resistance. The One Health section rethinks One Health and draws initial cartography
of its peripheral regions. The social determination of health section briefly compares the concepts of
social determination of health and social determinants of health. From this comparison and the
previous sections, I extend the idea of triple inequity of health to include other forms of inequities
and their interactions, with particular attention to species-based inequities. The field of praxis section
is based on Bourdieu’s concepts of habitus and field and Freire’s understanding of praxis. In that
section, I frame One Health of Peripheries as a blind spot of collective health. Finally, I present some
concluding remarks.

Biopolitics addresses new forms of power or aspects of power previously unknown, in the context of
phenomena  as  diverse  as  concentration  camps,  migratory  processes,  cognitive  capitalism,
domestication, sovereignty, the immunitary paradigm of modern politics, the relationship of humans
with others animals and with technology, the state of exception, and power/knowledge relationships
(4,28–37). Such diversity brings ambivalence and contradiction as well as negative (marginalizing,
excluding, repressing) and positive (affirmative, productive, empowering) perspectives. Biopolitics
shows the blurring of the public/private boundary, the politics on life and of life, the administration
of  populations, the  production  of  profitable  and docile  bodies,  and  marginalizing  apparatuses
underlying hierarchies (31,36,38).

Here it is convenient to come back to the notion of apparatus as the system of relations between
discursive practices, institutions, and more generally,  anything with the capacity to determine,
control, model, or administer living beings. This notion is related to the authorities of delimitation
(39)—“including philosophical, religious, scientific and legal”—that delimit and authorize margins
and legitimize their practices (40). As one can read in Derrida (41), the original marginalization is
constitutive of the socialization of “human culture and of politics itself”; it is a marginalization that
leaves animals on the periphery and allows their domestication. Such domestication  gives rise to
disciplinary and violent regimes (40) and to population technologies for the administration of life. It
becomes a model of exploitation and establishes the basis of hierarchical orderings.

Animal domestication required demographic technologies to control population densities, a complex
mixture of enforcement and behavioral tactics to administer animal resistance, and care procedures to
sustain life. The ensuing more-than-human social relationships established a complex network of
codetermination. Demographic technologies for animals allowed human demographic processes of
growth and specialization. Food surplus stimulated the formation of storage specialists, leading to
positive feedback on food surplus and available time for the emergence of population administrators,
accumulation experts, and bureaucrats  (42). Animals were not the unique target of the mentioned
mixture.

The increasing size and complexity of multispecies settlements was the basis for further social
differentiation, unequal distribution of resources, and colonization (42,43); a process resting on the
war against animals (44), the domestication of human collectives, and technologies of accumulation.

Domestication  also determined  another  phenomenon  of relevance  for more-than-human  health.
Higher multispecies densities set an appropriate scene for emerging zoonoses and epidemics. So
domestication is also a history of epidemics, turned into pandemics by colonization.

The biopolitics of domestication is not a finished remote history. Medical textbooks for 19th-century
landowners described procedures to reproduce slaves and increase their productive efficiency, in
many respects indistinguishable of current livestock production procedures: compartmentalization of
facilities; populations divided according to demographic criteria of productive and reproductive
interest; classification and monitoring of morbidity and mortality; prevention of communicable
diseases; reproductive selection (genetic improvement); hygiene, nutrition, socialization, and other
generic practices to reduce losses of biological capital [see the documented analyses of such practices
by Smithers and Camacho (45,46)]. In the 20th century, the anti-Semite Henry Ford talked in his
autobiography about the disassembly line of a Chicago slaughterhouse that inspired his assembly-line
method (47,48), which in turn informed assembly lines to kill Jews in Nazi Germany (30,48). In the
current century, big data and artificial intelligence fuel genetic and molecular interventions and
disease surveillance across species, sophisticating biopolitics and further blurring binary distinctions:
natural/artificial, human/nonhuman, public/private.

Marginalizing apparatuses come into play when biopolitics inflict suffering and produce privileges.
They  are  constituents  of  speciesist,  racist,  ethnic,  class,  gender,  capacity,  and  geographic
marginalization.  Furthermore,  the  interaction  among marginalizing  apparatuses  creates  multiple
peripheries.

Animalization is a marginalizing apparatus applied to some human groups. As recently as 1920, the
Wildlife Conservation Society (the same institution that decades later proposed the One Health
concept) was responsible for exhibiting Ota Benga, a young black man, at the Bronx Zoo  (49).
Pugliese makes a "deanthropocentric" reading of Foucault's Madness and Civilization to argue that
the lack of rationality operated the animalization of the so-called mad people, justifying their
confinement  and  physical  restriction  (40).  Besides  these  and  other  conspicuous  examples  of
animalization,  more  nuanced  practices  reinforce  human  marginalization  (think  in  everyday
language). Moreover, animalization also operates in animals, establishing a category of exploitable
beings for human benefit.

It is worth noting that animalization does not consistently downplay animals. Sometimes “animal”
features  are  exalted  and  attributed  to  humans  (fondness,  strength,  agility)  while  “human”
characteristics (criminal,  terrorist,  beggar)  justify  violence  against  certain  human  groups.
Animalization is inherently aporetic as it operates on who is already an animal, whether human or
not. Furthermore, animalization is not involved in all cases of human marginalization.

The interaction between marginalizing apparatuses encompasses more than animalization. Social
class determines the material resources of multispecies households. The opportunities for humans and
animals (especially the fate of farm animals) are conditioned by disability and sex. Gender is strongly
associated  with  animal  protection  advocacy.  Concentrated  Animal  Feeding  Operations  exploit
animals and hire marginalized ethnic groups to do unhealthy jobs (50). The racial marginalization of
human communities affects the multispecies collectives with which those humans entangle.

The above examples show that some margins directly intersect each other only in humans, others
intersect in humans and animals, while others simultaneously segregate multispecies collectives.
Race, gender, class, and ethnic margins rest on human attributes, and through them, they affect
multispecies collectives. Species, sex, and disability margins target human and animal subjects.
Geographic margins segregate multispecies collectives.

The examples are gross simplifications of more complex intersections. A Black non-heteronormative
woman  living  in  a  favela  and  protecting  animals  faces  the  burden  of  multiple  margins  that
compromise  the  capacity  to  care  for  her  animals.  Worsened  animal  health  and  insufficient
reproductive control increase the psychological and economic demands, while zoonotic spread and
animal  overpopulation exacerbate the community burden. Moreover, many humans  residing in
favelas  were  small  farmers  displaced  by agribusiness  apparatuses  that at  the  same  time  have
devastating consequences for traditional communities, wildlife, and exploited farm animals and
workers.

The idea of intersecting margins is not new. It is at the core of intersectionality, which emerged to
address the legal limitations to repair injustices suffered by Black women (51). One of the claims of
intersectionality is that the marginalization of black women is not the sum of sexist and racist
burdens; sex discrimination is not equally experienced by Black and White women, just as racial
discrimination differs between Black men and women  (51). Intersectionality has evolved among
scholars and activists, bringing together awareness, confusion, overuse, and deeper explanations. The
multiplicity of intersectional concerns has grown because there are many heterogeneous marginal
experiences.

The overlay of peripheries produces particular experiences of marginalization and resistance without
requiring that attributes  of direct marginalization  are present in the same individual  (as some
examples  above  showed).  Furthermore,  different  peripheries  share  borders,  giving  rise  to  a
remarkable  possibility:  articulating  each  periphery's  strengths  and  needs  supports  a  collective
resistance not to turn hierarchies upside-down but to break margins. Thus, marginalized multispecies
collectives can strengthen intersectionality and benefit from it, but that requires effective articulation,
a non-trivial task.

Earlier, I mentioned accumulation experts and accumulation technologies.  Later, the examples of
multispecies intersectionality implicitly showed that capitalism is a shared marginalizing apparatus,
that is to say, a common target of intersectional resistance. The biopolitics of animal populations was
a  condition  of  possibility  for  human  biopolitics,  colonization,  and  capitalism.  These,  in  turn,
reinforced  and  sophisticated  animal  biopolitics  and  produced  other  marginalizing  apparatuses.
Therefore, what is at stake is far from being a unidirectional process. A complex network of power
relationships  constantly  moves  margins  in  multiple  directions,  so  individual  and  collective
experiences of marginalization are also dynamic.

Marginalizing apparatuses mobilize exploitation, care, administration, discipline, subjectification,
resistance,  affects,  and  legitimization.  They  produce  and  reproduce  peripheries  that  partially
determine the health experience of multispecies collectives.

One  health  traditionally  refers  to  the  inextricable  relationship  between  human,  animal,  and
environmental health.  It is a concept growing in popularity and application due to the  increasing
awareness regarding many human diseases  with an  animal origin and  the multiple diseases  that
remain zoonotic; from AIDS to dengue and COVID-19, from visceral leishmaniasis to tuberculosis
and influenza A (52–54). According to the World Organization for Animal Health (OIE), 60% of
human infectious diseases are zoonotic, 75% of emerging human infectious diseases originate from
other animal species, and 80% of agents with bioterrorist potential are zoonotic  (17).  Neglected
tropical diseases are mostly zoonotic or vector-borne  (55) and affect more than a billion people
(56) as well as a high number of animals. Neglected tropical diseases are a priority recognized by the
World Health Organization (WHO) Assembly 66.12 of 2013, which  recommended One Health
approaches to their member  States  (57) to tackle its uncontrolled spread. In the face of growing
global  concern  about  emerging  and re-emerging  zoonoses  and  antimicrobial  resistance  due  to
indiscriminate overuse of antibiotics in human populations and other species, One Health catalyzed
the  tripartite  union  between  the WHO,  the OIE,  and  FAO  (16).  More  recently,  One  Health
approaches entered in the general and specific objectives of the European Union Programme for the
Union’s action in the field of health (‘EU4Health Programme’) for the period 2021-2027 (58).

One Health is often  represented as three partially intersected  sets (human, animal, environment).
Thus, although humans and animals are within the environment, part of the human and animal sets is
outside  it.  Furthermore,  the  partial  intersection  between  the  human  and  animal  domains is
incongruent with  evolutionary theory since humans are animals. Of course,  representations can
emphasize different issues; however, there is no need to leave part of the sets out of the intersection.
Subsumption serves to represent the relationships, and it is in line with the inclusiveness required to
promote One Health of Peripheries.

One Health of Peripheries, does not dogmatically cut animal taxonomy to leave the human species on
one side, and a wide variety of species on the other side (Figure 1). Instead, there are multispecies
collectives whose species-specific constitution depends on the health phenomenon in question; the
division of animal taxonomy into “human” and “animal” is understood as a  tool  that may have
didactic and strategic values and serve as semantic abbreviation; however, the uncritical use of this
tool conflates the division with a constant of “nature” and hides its biopolitical consequences.
The environment is not understood as an external  domain related or partially intersected by the
human  and  animal  domains. It  is  composed  of  multispecies collectives  and other agents,  so
approaches as actor-network theory can help to think about it  (10); the environment is a set of
relations and agents located by them; entanglements; agents that even as “individuals” reveal internal
environments of microbiota; complex assemblages of holobionts (59). It is an environment without
the dual ontology separating “human society” and “nature” (10,12,60,61).

There are many holistic approaches to promote the health of such an environment. Many indigenous
peoples have lived over centuries with a sense of integration reflected in sustainable and respectful
environmental  practices.  Agroecology  has  learned  from  them,  incorporates  contemporary
technologies, and brings equity to the center  (62,63). Living cities, recombinant ecosystems, and
other movements of sustainable urban systems offer alternatives for cities  (64–66). However, the
colonial mentality and capitalist order deplete resources and marginalize collective endeavors driven
by well-being instead of profit. Thus, breaking marginalizing apparatuses is as crucial here as
elsewhere.

Besides the substantial difference between conventional One Health and One Health of Peripheries as
conceptual frameworks, the last departs from the first in other directions. One Health of Peripheries is
a polysemic expression with an ontological, an epistemological, and a practical sense. The first sense
refers to attributes determining the well-being and suffering of peripheral multispecies collectives: a
state, a process, the realization of capacities (note that capacity is a key notion in health promotion).
The  second  problematizes the  marginalizing  apparatuses  that  determine  health.  The  third
encompasses practices against marginalization that informs and reinforces peripheral resistance and
learns from it. 

These three senses are not independent; each one is inherent to the others. While understanding and
practice are attributes of multispecies collectives, attributes and understandings are practices and
transformed by practice. Simultaneously, understanding gives sense to attributes and practices. This
polysemy has material consequences, as theorizing new attributes lead to other practices to pursue the
wellness of marginalized multispecies collectives.

The emphasis on marginalizing apparatuses has as a corollary the existence of an heterogeneous
peripheral cartography. Thus, what follows in this section is an outline of peripheral regions that are
anything  but  the  whole  cartography.  Choosing  some  peripheries  and  not  others  is  not  an
unproblematic  decision;  it  can  reinforce  marginalization.  Indeed,  we  can  not  do  everything
simultaneously, but for that very reason, we must problematize what is at stake in prioritization. My
decision is somehow arbitrary and shaped by my background. Nevertheless, I hope it sheds some
light on pathways to identify and fracture even the margins I omit.

With renowned institutions listing neglected diseases, it is easier to see how the pharmaceutical
industry disregards the needs of unprofitable populations. However, stressing diseases might divert
attention from a fundamental point of neglect. Many tourists have information about the safer travel
periods to avoid malaria, access to preventive medication, and health insurance to receive the best
available treatment regime if they got infected. Rabies vaccine has been around for decades, but
approximately 60 thousand humans die of rabies each year, mainly in the global South. Thus, not
anybody with a neglected disease is neglected and what is at stake is not only the existence of
pharmaceutical treatments.

The fundamental  neglect  resides  on multispecies  collectives  and demands  more than outreach
policies. People representing those collectives need effective political inclusion; plural education to
solve their problems and sustainably build their communities; food security and sovereignty; the
multispecies  collectives  need  more-than-human  health  systems  and  participative  conservation
programs.

Violence is a cause of morbidity and mortality, and among the approaches to address its complexity,
it is the prevention of violence against animals. Conviviality with companion animals is growing, and
in some countries, there are more dogs and cats than children in households (67,68). In multispecies
homes, animals enter into family dynamics and can be victims of domestic violence. The violence
against them is related to the violence against children and women (69–73). In addition to victims,
animals are instruments of coercion used by perpetrators to cause more suffering and control their
human victims (74–78).

Domestic violence does not stem exclusively from individual psychological factors.  Lifestyles,
conditioned  by  processes  of  social  reproduction,  favor  or  protect  against  domestic  violence,
depending on their configuration. Therefore,  it is important to consider the relationship between
social vulnerability, interpersonal violence, and violence against companion animals (79–83).

The investigation of violence against animals  helps to detect domestic violence  cases involving
several victims and broadens the understanding of the perpetrators’ psychological profile  (72).
Furthermore,  animals  can promote  collective care  and  self-care to  counter  violence  (84,85).
However,  the  effective  prevention of domestic violence must address social vulnerability and its
social determination, in the broad sense, without being restricted to economic poverty and exploring
underlying  marginalizing  apparatuses.  It  must  dismantle  the  patriarchal  apparatus  underlying
domestic violence. Domestic violence in One Health of Peripheries is socially determined, affects
humans and animals, and has institutionalized dimensions.

Geographic  peripheries  are  heterogeneous,  encompassing  countries,  areas  circumscribed  within
countries, and cross-border regions such as rural areas, indigenous territories, and favelas. Taking the
last as an example,  we can see how geographic marginalization also circumscribes epidemiologic
profiles.  Favela is a term with pejorative connotations,  unsolved by euphemisms.  It refers more
directly to the geographically delimited precariousness ensuing from the historical exploitation and
concentration of wealth.  Simultaneously, its polysemy point to the constant meaning-making and
remaking from within; to the place from which resistance, creativity, and sensitivity produce other
epistemologies and lifestyles.

The favelas challenge conventional census methods and thus receive differentiated treatment, starting
from their identification. For instance, the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE)
defines  favelas  as  places  with  at  least  51  housing  units  irregularly  occupied,  under urban
irregularities, or lacking essential public services (86). It calls them subnormal agglomerates. Census
definitions, although limited, give an idea of quantity. There were 6329 favelas in which 6% of the
Brazilian  population  lived  in 2010. The  State  of São Paulo had  the  highest  concentration  of
households in favelas (23.2%), including approximately 11% of its metropolitan population (86).
Thus, health problems affecting favelas compromise millions of individuals in the country. Globally,
projections suggest that in 2030 the human population will be 8.1 billion, 5 billion (61.7%) will live
in urban areas, and 2 billion (24.7%) will live in favelas (87).

The neglect of favelas continues worldwide. The health in favelas is different from the urban health
and health in poverty because not all people living in favelas are poor, and not all poor people in
cities live in them (88). The favelas’ contextual effects on health are mediated by imposed risks and
the lack of resources (money, time, infrastructure, knowledge), establishing a vicious circle of
vulnerability due to the increased burden of diseases that compromises the individuals’ opportunities
for economic and social inclusion.

The favelas’ contextual effects impinge on multispecies collectives, and this is even more neglected.
Animals  are  exposed  and  vulnerable  to  pollution,  humidity,  darkness,  insufficient  ventilation,
malnutrition, and high population densities. There is a need to promote animal health for the sake of
the animals but also for the sake of humans living with them. The life cycle of animals is shorter than
in humans. Its monitoring contributes to the early detection of chronic diseases and other health
problems resulting from exposure to unhealthy environments (89,90). As favelas’ boundaries are not
hermetic and do not entirely restrict their contextual effects, improving their health reflects outside
them. Favelas are peripheral but not isolated. Turning favelas into healthy places reduce infectious
diseases, the need to use antibiotics, and thus antimicrobial resistance, one of the top ten global health
problems according to the WHO. But as with any periphery, that turn requires structural changes, the
dismantling of the underlying marginalizing apparatuses.

“Homelessness” usually refers to the condition of humans without a permanent residence, a dynamic
situation that can vary from one day to a lifetime, depending on the availability of social and
economic resources to have access to such permanent residence.

Homelessness is a structural problem of social organization around private property, worsened by the
precariousness of working conditions and welfare policies.  However, it also results from other
processes, such as the abandonment of homes to escape domestic violence or home dynamics
incompatible with drug abuse, psychiatric illnesses, and other conditions.

In addition to humans, companion animals can turn homeless due to abandonment or because they
got lost. They may be born homeless, remaining as such for the rest of their lives or until rescue.
Dogs and cats are still properties, and therefore their homelessness also represents a private property
problem. On the one hand, the legal consequences of abandoning an animal property might not be
sufficiently persuasive to avoid animal abandonment. On the other hand, the property status might
reduce and even eliminate the moral responsibility regarding animal abandonment.

Although the processes that lead humans and companion animals to homelessness are different, some
effects are similar regardless of the species. Homeless individuals suffer abuse. Adversities (climatic,
nutritional, emotional) cause suffering and compromise the immune system, thus adding to the lack
of hygiene that predisposes to infectious diseases, worsened by the lack of access to health services.

In their marginalized condition, homeless humans and dogs  find each other and  create emotional
bonds (91,92). Humans even prioritize dogs when sharing available food (93), and may prefer to
remain on the streets than stay overnight in places that do not accept their canine companions (94).
Citing Sakelaropoulos et al. (95), Taylor describes the humans’ emotional bonds with cats and even
rats (92). The latter and other synanthropic species live on public spaces and pose specific challenges
that increase the health complexity of multispecies collectives living on the streets.

Direct actions on homeless multispecies collectives could involve networks of shelters and adoption
programs for humans (mainly children in the case of adoption) and companion animals, as well as
contraceptive and “humanitarian” elimination programs for synanthropic populations. These actions
complement but do not replace structural approaches of health promotion and disease risk prevention.
Regardless of their species, the homeless are members of the living cities conceptualized in critical
geography (64). One Health in the urban context turns out to be the health of these living cities, and
their improvement demands special considerations about homelessness. First, promoting lifestyles as
opposed to the conditions that lead humans and companion animals to homelessness. Second, urban
planning to promote biodiversity; planning for the so-called recombinant ecosystems and green cities
(64,66).

Ending hunger is one of the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals (96). Agribusiness has
responded to such  a  goal by intensifying production, reducing food prices, generating jobs, and
contributing to Gross Domestic Product (GDP). However, qualifying that response requires taking
externalities  into  account.  Although  some  externalities  are  gaining  visibility,  others  remain
peripheral.

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) concluded, with a high level of confidence,
that “climate change is expected to lead to increases in ill-health in many regions and especially in
developing countries with low income, as compared to a baseline without climate change” (97).
Greenhouse gases (GHG) are the leading cause of climate change (98), and farm animals are the
largest source in agriculture (99). Furthermore, single-crop farming is another source of GHG itself.
Its expansion often leads to more emissions due to the intensification of farm animal production to
compensate for the loss of pastures (100).

The expansion of agricultural frontiers reduces biodiversity and increases the risk of many zoonoses
occurrence  (101).  However, zoonoses  control proposals are typically biomedical or focused on
proximate risk factors. They hardly question the food production systems’ status quo, thus losing the
opportunity to find more favorable scenarios in terms of zoonoses, preservation of biodiversity, and
other externalities. Moreover, the loss of biodiversity is  rarely understood as a direct  One Health
problem, characterized by increases in mortality rates of multiple animal and plant species (102), and
losses of multiple ethnic collectives.

Water consumption and pollution are other externalities of agribusiness. In Brazil, for example, it is
estimated that land irrigation consumes 72% of the country’s water supply (103), and feeding farm
animals consume  79% of the cultivated protein (104). Simultaneously, the water network did not
serve 33.2 million people in 2018 (105). In animal production systems, sources of water pollution
include pharmaceutical residues (including antibiotics), heavy metals, chemicals, excrement, and
pathogens;  as for crops, in addition to heavy metals and chemicals, pesticides  with carcinogenic
potential are of particular concern (106).

Agribusiness creates jobs and contributes to GDP. However, it matters what kind of jobs, in a context
of employees  with little bargaining power against growing oligopolies  (107,108). For instance, in
subaltern  countries,  subsidies  persuade  smallholders  to  submit  themselves  to  exploitation  by
transnational corporations at the expense of agrarian reforms to promote diversified agriculture
equitably  (107,108). Meanwhile, in  rich countries,  unhealthy conditions in intensive production
systems difficult the recruit domestic workers, which has been circumvented by hiring immigrants,
including those who are not authorized to work. (109,110).

Unhealthy work can occur for several reasons. In the production of fruits and vegetables, pesticides
are potential carcinogens (106,111,112). In intensive animal production systems, toxic gases, vapors,
and particles pollute the air and cause respiratory diseases  (113–115).  Farm environments and
slaughterhouses can predispose to physical trauma, depression, and drug use (50,110). Stressful and
overpopulated environments also predispose to animal diseases, and their treatment with antibiotics
results in  antimicrobial  resistance  affecting human  workers  and  their  families  (116–119).  In
slaughterhouses, the mass killing of animals is a violent job that can affect the employees’ mental
health and has been  causally linked to increased crime rates in communities neighboring  such
slaughterhouses (120).

The externalities on farm animal wellness have been explored elsewhere (108,121). Here I want to
emphasize that despite recent theoretical advances on multispecies justice and labor issues involving
animals  (13,15),  forcing animals  to produce continues without considering labor rights  for them.
Farm animals are subjected to a commodification strategy that transforms the violence perpetrated on
sentient beings into procedures to increase production efficiency.

While happy farm animals appear in bucolic images (in children’s books and milk packages) and Ag-
gag laws prevent the investigation and disclosure of animal abuse (122,123), the real farm animals
are pushed  to  their  physiological  limit,  constantly  expanded  by  genetic,  medical,  and
pharmacological technologies. Billions of these animals are slaughtered, requiring hasty procedures
that challenge labor safety and animal suffering mitigation. Moreover, cruelty procedures continue in
use: male chicks shredded alive  when the objective is  egg production;  sows housed in cells that
prevent them from turning their bodies; small cages that do not allow birds to extend their wings;
prematurely broken  mother-offspring bonds; routine amputation and without anesthesia of beaks,
teeth, horns, and tails to increase confinement density and avoid cannibalism  ensuing from the
stressing environment.

Agribusiness produces externalities protected by strategies of governmentality (108). It destroys the
environment and uses cruel methods against animals. Simply talking about job creation and GDP
contribution  does  not  say  anything  about  the  working  conditions  or  the  profit  distribution.
Externalities, including subsidies, outweigh the final prices paid by consumers of agribusiness’
commodities and threaten global sustainability. Agribusiness marginalize multispecies collectives
inside and outside farms.

There are discussions about health complexity beyond biomedical issues. In Latin America, social
medicine  (nowadays  collective  health  and  critical  epidemiology) has developed conceptual
frameworks for the social determination of health since the 1970s. After the turn of the century, the
WHO  has popularized  a  conceptual  framework  of  the social  determinants  of  health.  Despite
criticisms from critical epidemiology to the WHO proposal for being in practice more complicit with
the  status quo  structuring inequities (1,124,125), both positions  point to the need to transcend
biologism and individualism in health,  but they also reduce the social to the human domain.
However,  some  approaches  to  One  Health  show  that  reducing  social  relations  to  humans  is
misleading  (23,52,126), whereas biopolitics and sociology set background to think a more-than-
human social determination of health (9–11,30,127–129).

In  the  WHO’s  conceptual  framework,  structural  determinants  create  health  inequities  through
intermediary  determinants (3).  The  structural  determinants  refer  to  the  mechanisms  by  which
political, economic, and social contexts generate “hierarchies of power, prestige, and access to
resources”  (3).  The  intermediary determinants  are  material  and  psychosocial  circumstances,
behavioral and biological factors, and the health system itself; they are a consequence of individuals’
hierarchical positions.  They are also the cause of exposures and vulnerabilities  leading to  health
inequities (3).

Social cohesion and social capital are considered as both structural and intermediary determinants
while  the health state affects individuals’ opportunities and thus feedback into the  hierarchical
structure (3). In short, it is a conceptual framework of causal nature where structural determinants
have  a  position  of  precedence  and  prominence.  The  identification  and  measurement  of  the
hypothetical effect of causal factors inform decision-making to reduce health inequities.

The social determination of health theorized in Latin America is not synthesized in a single reference.
However, a common feature of different perspectives is that social determination is a category of
critical analysis (1,2,130,131). According to Samaja, social determination is a historical and ongoing
process through which social hierarchy levels are “self-produced and reproduced, generating tensions
and conflicts that motivate actions of restoration and transformation” (131) [translation is mine]. A
given hierarchical level reproduces itself as a whole, regulating its parts (levels subsumed by it) to
maintain  the  whole  structure  (131).  However,  the  regulation  is  not  absolute,  and  the  relative
autonomy of the parts is a source of change that  produces new wholes (levels subsuming them)
(131).

In this dialectic movement between regulation and relative autonomy, healthy and unhealthy forces
configure epidemiologic profiles characteristic of the different hierarchical levels and positions
within the levels  (130). For instance, the family is one of such levels.  The relative autonomous
lifestyles of  family members, as well as the regulations from higher social organization  levels
(community,  political-administrative  territorial  divisions,  contractual  associations,  and  other
institutions ), determine their epidemiologic profile.

Despite fundamental differences between the two  conceptual frameworks,  they  intersect  at two
points.  Both identify a structural dimension (socioeconomic and political context in the  social
determinants; social  production  and reproduction  in the  social  determination) and  the  ensuing
hierarchy that imposes constraints on individuals according to their hierarchical position. Both point
to the triple inequity of health determined by class, gender, and race/ethnicity.

One Health of Peripheries  also intersects these points. The first from a biopolitical perspective in
which the political is neither an external precursor of hierarchies nor an instrument monopolized by
the most privileged hierarchical levels. The political is the relationships among individuals, the
hierarchical order itself, it is realized and not owned, it is the foucauldian micro-physics of power
(132) involving animals. Therefore, One Health of Peripheries participates in the second intersection
in its theorizing of multispecies forms of health inequity.

Structural One Health is another helpful reference that goes beyond proximate causes to explore the
crucial role of agribusiness in the production of zoonoses and pandemics through circuits of capital
(52). However, it is worth noting that structural One Health and One Health of Peripheries differ.
First, there is a difference of scope because One Health of Peripheries extends beyond infectious
diseases. Second, structural One Health stresses more extensive empirical causal processes, whereas
One Health of Peripheries agree with the need for more comprehensive causal explanations but
stresses dialectical process to overcome the limitation of causal reasoning and empirical evidence.
Third, power relations and health inequities are explicit multispecies phenomena in One Health of
Peripheries.. It is beyond the scope of this paper to explore the details of the social determination of
One Health of Peripheries, so I will leave that for future works.

Field and habitus are bourdieusian concepts incorporated in collective health. From them, we can
think about health practices and knowledge as elaborated by  subjects  conditioned by symbolic
structures like language and culture that allow and shape their representations and actions. Therefore,
health is for health practitioners what they can know about it, so transforming the conditions that
make knowledge possible changes health. In other words, the transformation of symbolic structures is
also a health practice and affects health.

Practices are produced, perceived, and appreciated by habitus, a system of schemes “constituted in
the course of collective history and acquired [and transformed] in the course of individual history”
(8,133) [translation is mine]. Individuals’ habitus depends on hierarchies, so individual’s perceptions,
knowledge, and practices reveal their position and shape their relationships with individuals in other
hierarchical places.

The field is the social space constituted by hierarchical relationships that condition the habitus and
gain  from this  its meaning and value  (134). In the  filed, cooperation and conflict preserve or
transform hierarchies. The most privileged positions have more capital—economic, cultural, social,
and symbolic—to shape and legitimize hierarchies according to their interests. These interests are not
necessarily conscious because, as part of the habitus, they are inculcated in “institutionalized spaces
(family, school) by specialized agents who impose arbitrary norms using disciplinary techniques” (8)
[translation is mine].

Peripheral positions “intervene as a passive, contrasting reference point”  (8) [translation is mine].
Here is again the contrasting position of animals; those who want more capital to fight and legitimize
their interests need a “social promotion experienced as an ontological transformation or as a process
of civilization, a leap from nature to culture, from animality to humanity” (8) [translation is mine].
Thus, our relationships with animals are among the conditions of possibility of the  habitus  we
acquire, and this, in turn, gives meaning and value to multispecies assemblages.

Depending on the habitus and the field, one will see, among others, unfitted mads who deserve their
misfortunes, or psychiatric patients who can become more productive when receiving treatments
provided by the pharmaceutical industry, or unhealthy exploitation regimes by way of progress. One
will  see pests  and  reservoirs  of  infectious  agents  that  threaten  public  health,  or  multispecies
collectives that  share susceptibilities,  in need of comprehensive health policies. Therefore, what
enters into the health field and the way it enters is a social process.

Health practice is not neutral and can reinforce inequities. On the contrary, promoting One Health of
Peripheries is an explicit commitment to reduce more-than-human inequities. Thus, the field of
practice for such promotion is more specific; it is a field of praxis. Here I take praxis from Paulo
Freire as reflexive action against oppression, towards liberation (135). Praxis as action informed by
knowledge about the pathological effects of marginalization, and knowledge built on actions against
marginalization. 

In the  field  of  collective  health,  there  is  extensive  reference to “health  promotion”  and  “life
preservation” (136), non-anthropocentric perspectives (1), and “diversity of objects and theoretical
discourses, without recognizing any hierarchical and evaluative perspective about them” (137) [the
translations are mine]. However, any generic reference to life or health is systematically pointed to
the human, overlooking that life and health are more-than-human. This is a blind spot of collective
health, brought to light by the praxis of One Health of Peripheries.

As a subfield of health, collective health does not need to cover everything that concerns health, and
in this sense,  it could be limited to the human. However, if collective health is transdisciplinary
(138), concerned with the social determination of health  (1), and aims at the “production of an
expanded  knowledge  of health”  (139) [translation  is mine], it  should promote  One Health of
Peripheries.

One Health of Peripheries is experience, understanding, and transformation to improve the wellness
of marginalized multispecies collectives. One Health of Peripheries is about breaking margins to
pursue multispecies justice.

Biopolitics and other critical perspectives offer conceptual tools to understand why marginalizing
apparatuses  determine  most  of  the  burden  of  ill-health  and  why  we  need  multispecies
intersectionality to achieve equitable alternatives.

Biological solutions stripped from the more-than-human social reality will not solve the remarkable
challenges  posed  by  mainstream  One  Health.  Indeed,  insisting  on  supposed  apolitical  and
nonideological epidemiologic settings of transmissible and physiopathological processes is part of the
problem, just as pretending that all we need is a strong pharmaceutical industry supported by patents,
intersectoral collaborations without addressing asymmetric power relashinships, and good deeds of
the global North towards the global South.

The social determination of health is a comprehensive framework to embrace health complexity.
However, it has a blind spot: One Health of Peripheries. The anthropocentrism of collective health
perpetuates marginalization and limits the reach of health promotion.

One Health of Peripheries takes advantage of more-than-human biopolitics, One Health, collective
health, and other sources of knowledge to inform the commitment of taking multispecies collectives
out of peripheries. Such diversity inevitably incorporates theoretical difficulties.

It is worth noting that I am talking about One Health  of  Peripheries instead of One Health  on
Peripheries. That makes the commitment stronger as it is not purported to be a top-down endeavor.
As a side comment, it was working with communities in favelas that I felt the need for a different
theoretical background. Thus, I ended up trying to give sense to One Health of Peripheries.

The plurality of (academic, popular, and traditional) knowledge and the participatory commitment of
One Health of Peripheries need an explicit agenda. In another paper, we frame colonial apparatuses
of marginalization, elaborate on how the epistemologies of the South are suitable to work with plural
knowledge, and propose seven actions to promote One Health of Peripheries (18).

I am grateful to the multispecies community of the São Remo favela (São Paulo, SP, Brazil). At the 
University of São Paulo, I acknowledge the One Health of Peripheries network (Saúde Única em 
Periferias – SUP-USP) and the Research group on Peripheries (nPeriferias-IEA-USP). I especially 
acknowledge Professor Flavia Mori Sarti for her comments to improve the reading of the paper. 
