Objective: To estimate the incidence of excess of body weight in the school period and 
explore possible association with prenatal factors. 

Methodology: An epidemiological study 
with a longitudinal design was carried out. All children from the first to the fifth grade of 
elementary school, aged between seven and 10 years old, enrolled in public and private 
schools and from families residing in Palhoça City, Santa Catarina State, who had participated 
in the previous stage of the study in 2015, were included. To obtain the BMI, weight and 
height were collected in schools. Data related to the prenatal period were obtained with 
interviews with mothers or guardians, at home. The analyses were performed using Poisson 
Regression with a robust estimator. Statistically significant variables and those with p ≤ 0.25 
in the bivariate analysis were included in the multivariate. 

Results: 228 students were 
included. The incidence rate of excess weight was 19.3%, with 17.1% being overweight and 
2.2% being obese. The results of the multivariate analysis showed that students who were 
born with Apgar in the first minute ≤ 7 had a statistically significant risk and 34% higher 
relative risk of developing excess weight in the school period. 

Conclusion: The incidence of 
overweight was 19.3%. Prenatal factors were not associated with incidence, except for a low 
Apgar score in the first minute. 

Being overweight is considered a serious health problem worldwide, affecting 
children, adolescents, adults, and older people1. The transition from being an overweight or 
obese child or adolescent into adulthood is characterized as a public health problem2. The 
increase in prevalence of overweight children represents high risks of mortality in adulthood, 
as well as increasing expenses in treatment and control3. Estimations say that for every two 
obese children, one can become an obese adult, directly affecting their health4. 

According to the Pan American Health Organization, between 20 and 25% of 
individuals under 19 are affected by overweight in Latin America2. According to data from 
the Family Budget Survey conducted in 2008 and 2009 in Brazil, overweight has a high 
prevalence rate, which has been increasing over the years. Among children from 5 to 9, 32% 
of girls were overweight and 12% were obese5.  

Thus, studying the etiological factors of overweight children with different approaches 
is important to identify this condition as early as possible, enabling interventions in the early 
stages of life, even before the problem sets in. This corroborates what the Brazilian 
Guidelines on Obesity propose6, which point to the probability of an obese child becoming an 
obese adult ranging from 20 to 50%.  

Obesity, just like other noncommunicable diseases (NCDs), has complex etiologies 
and happens since long back in life7. In this context, a previously controversial, but now 
widely accepted, etiological approach is theoretically supported by the Barker hypothesis, 
also called the biological programming hypothesis8. Barker8 related nutrition and exposure to 
infections during the fetal period to the onset of disease in individuals years later. Among the 
possible existing relations, he highlighted nutritional and environmental problems that 
occurred during intrauterine life and chronic diseases, such as coronary heart disease, 
diabetes, hypertension, and the increase in cholesterol rates in adulthood8. Thus, experiences 
that occur early, including prenatal factors, could influence the future health condition of the 
child and adult, assuming that the health status at any age is a result not only of current 
conditions, but also of accumulation of conditions that have been incorporated throughout 
life9, including the prenatal period. 

In order to improve the understanding of the determinants of overweight in children 
and, consequently, to identify behaviors and situations that can be modified, exploring 
interactions between possible early determining factors and the future incidence of 
overweight children is of utmost importance. Understanding the interaction of these factors in 
this period can assist in planning health and prevention policies. 

However, there is little research that considers these ideas in the study of determining 
overweight at the population level. Methodologically, using a population-based longitudinal 
design is interesting, with a retrospective cohort, associated to prospective follow-ups, to 
understand childhood obesity in a broad and exhaustive way. 

Therefore, the present study aims to estimate the incidence of overweight in school 
years and explore its possible interaction with prenatal factors. 

This is an epidemiological study with a longitudinal design called Coorte Brasil Sul10 
and carried out in Palhoça Municipality, located in the metropolitan region of Greater 
Florianópolis City/Santa Catarina State. 

The study population was composed of all children from the first to the fifth year of 
elementary school, aged between 7 and 10, in 2019. Children born in 2009, enrolled in public 
and private schools in the municipality, from families residing in Palhoça and who 
participated in the previous phases (2009 and 2015) of the study Coorte Brasil Sul were 
included10. The process of obtaining the sample can be seen in Figure 1. 

The teams responsible for data collection were composed of trained and professionals. 
Team members were responsible for carrying out data collection, registering according to 
previously defined criteria, in addition to organizing the flow of children who had the Free 
and Informed Consent Term (Termo de Consentimento Livre e Esclarecido — TCLE) and the 
Free and Informed Assent Term (Termo de Assentimento Livre e Esclarecido) signed. The 
selection and training of evaluators were carried out by the researchers responsible for the 
study, aiming to minimize any measurement bias. Two nutritionist evaluators were selected, 
who participated in a training process for data collection. The techniques and procedures for 
measuring measures were based on the standards of the National Institute of Metrology, 
Quality and Technology (Instituto Nacional de Metrologia, Qualidade e Tecnologia — 
Inmetro)11 and the guidelines by the World Health Organization (WHO)12. 

Data collection was performed with anthropometric tests, for the purpose of 
calculating the body mass index (BMI)13,14. A calibrated digital scale and a wall stadiometer 
were used. To obtain the BMI, children’s weight and height were collected during visits to 
schools, using the method recommended by the Brazilian Ministry of Health14.  

For the collection of weight, the child was barefoot, wearing light clothes and did not 
carry any objects; the examiner turned on the scale before the child was positioned, waited for 
the scale to reach 0, positioned the child in the center of equipment, upright, with feet together 
and arms extended along the body, and then performed measurement after weight was fixed 
on the display. To collect height, the examiner instructed the child to stand upright, with arms 
outstretched, head up, look at a fixed point at eye level, parallel legs, with the feet forming a 
right angle with them, and the calves, buttocks, scapulae, and the back of the head (occipital 
region) against the stadiometer. The examiner then lowered the mobile part of equipment, 
fixing it against the head, with sufficient pressure to compress the child’s hair, removed the 
individual and performed height reading, without releasing the mobile part of equipment. The 
data were recorded in a clinical-epidemiological form. 

Data were collected in duplicate in 5% of the studied population, which was selected 
at random, with the aim of allowing monitoring of diagnostic reproducibility during the 
collection process. Results showed acceptable reproducibility values, all with Kappa > 0.7. 
Parents’ failure to sign the consent form, the child’s lack of consent at the time of data 
collection, and the child’s absence on the day of data collection at school were defined as loss 
and refusals. 

The main study outcome was the incidence of overweight children. Independent 
variables were classified into: sociodemographic—sex (male or female), child’s ethnicity/skin 
color of the child (white or non-white), father’s occupation at birth (unemployed/no income, 
or employed/with income), mother’s occupation at birth (unemployed/at home, or 
employed/with income), father’s education at birth (zero to eight years completed or more 
than eight years completed), mother’s education at birth (zero to eight years completed or 
more than eight years completed); pregnancy characteristics—mother’s age during pregnancy 
(13 to 19 or 20 years or more), planned pregnancy (no or yes), pregnancy weight gain (up to 
10 kg or more than 10 kg), prenatal consultations (up to five or six and more), smoking (yes 
or no), alcohol intake (yes or no), diabetes mellitus (yes or no), high blood pressure (yes or 
no), infectious diseases (yes or no); and, finally, characteristics of birth and child—gestational 
age (up to 37 weeks or 38 weeks or more), delivery type (cesarean section or vaginal), birth 
weight in relation to gestational age (large for gestational age or appropriate for gestational 
age), head circumference (< 32 and > 36 or 33 to 36), Apgar in the first minute (≤ 7 or 8 and 
more), birth problems (yes or no). 

The collected data were inserted into Excel spreadsheets and later exported to the IBM 
Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (IBM SPSS®) 18.0 program, in which they were 
analyzed. Prior to the analysis, bank cleaning procedure searched for incomplete data and 
eliminated any inconsistencies. Descriptive statistics of the variables studied were performed 
with frequency distribution tables. Analyzes were conducted using Poisson regression with a 
robust estimator. All statistically significant variables (p ≤ 0.05) and those with p ≤ 0.25 in the 
bivariate analysis were included in the multivariate analysis to identify an independent 
relation between them, making it possible to point out possible confounding factors. Thus, the 
relative risks (RR) and their respective confidence intervals (CI) were estimated at a 95% 
accuracy level. 

The project was submitted to and approved by the Research Ethics Committee with 
Human Beings of Universidade do Sul de Santa Catarina (UNISUL), under the protocol of the 
Certificate of Presentation for Ethical Appreciation (Certificado de Apresentação para 
Apreciação Ética — CAAE) nº 04377218.1.0000.5369.  

The incidence rate of overweight in the four-year follow-up period (2015 to 2019), a 
period in which students (n = 228) were in the age group from seven to 10, was 19.3% 
(95%CI 14.2; 24.4). Overweight incidence was 17.1% (95%CI 12.2; 22), and obesity was 
2.2% (95%CI 0.2; 4.1). 

Results of the study of association between prenatal factors and overweight incidence 
in the study period are presented below. Table 1 shows that no statistically significant 
associations were observed between sociodemographic variables of students and their parents 
at birth with overweight incidence. Table 2 shows a significant association between the 
mother’s age during pregnancy and overweight incidence (p = 0.021).  

Table 3 shows that among birth characteristics, school children that had an Apgar ≤ 7 
in the first minute and presented problems during delivery showed a greater overweight 
incidence in the study period (p = 0.028 and p = 0.038, respectively).  

However, the multiple analysis results, presented in Table 4, show that the variables 
mother’s age during pregnancy and mothers’ report of problems during delivery lost their 
significance. Thus, school children who were born with Apgar ≤ 7 in the first minute had a 
34% higher risk and independent of being overweight in school years [RR = 1.36 (95%CI 
1.07; 1.72)] (p = 0.011). 

The present study found that the overweight incidence rate among students was high. 
Roughly, one in five children developed overweight in the school period when they were 
between 7 and 10 years old. Currently, 18% of the population of children aged between 5 and 
19 are overweight worldwide, of which 7% are obese15. Overweight prevalence in Brazil is 
24.6% in children aged 10 to 19 and 35.9% in children aged 5 to 916.  

Other studies also point to high incidence rates. A systematic review on the incidence 
of childhood obesity that included 19 articles, three from the United States with nationally 
representative data, was published in 201617. One of the studies included follow-up data from 
1980 to 1988, with an annual incidence of 1.3% in children aged 4 to 1018. The second, 
evaluated the period between 1980 and 1998, and the annual incidence was 1.7% in children 
of the same age group19. The latter20, followed a cohort of children born in 1993, with an 
average age of 5.6 to 14.1, and an average follow-up of two years. Obesity incidence was 
11.9% in all age groups, and the annual incidence in the age group like that of the present 
study was 3%. A cohort study21 followed children from three to six years old in Vietnam for 
three years, between 2013 and 2016. Overweight incidence rates of 12.4 and 2.7% for obesity 
were estimated. A prospective cohort22 conducted in the United States followed children aged 
five to 14 and found that 11.9% of them became obese. Obesity incidence in children between 
five and 14 years old was four times higher among those overweight at five, compared to 
children with normal weight at the same age. 

In a scenario of high incidence rate in the school period, this study sought to 
contribute to the understanding of the determination of overweight by investigating the 
influence of prenatal aspects at this time in the child’s life. The rationale was based on the 
hypothesis of Barker’s biological programming8. Although the results presented herein have 
not brought any striking evidence, the relation between aspects of early life and overweight in 
children has been shown and includes biological, environmental, and behavioral risk factors 
related to events in the fetal period23-27.  

Pre-gestational maternal BMI, excessive gestational weight gain, diabetes during 
pregnancy, delivery, birth weight, maternal smoking, maternal dietary patterns, exposure to 
maternal intestinal microbiome and antibiotics, and stress maternal psychosocial factors are 
related to the child’s body composition. Moreover, prenatal biological risk factors can interact 
with environmental and behavioral factors, in addition to postnatal risk factors, and contribute 
to the development of obesity23-27. 

In addition, the microbiota in human intestine plays an important role in adipogenesis. 
Evidence links prenatal exposure to antibiotics with the risk of childhood obesity28-37. Given 
that these drugs alter the normal microbial colonization of the newborn’s intestine. There is 
evidence that exchanges in the intestinal microbiota of mother and child occur at birth, in the 
case of vaginal or cesarean delivery, by contact with the vaginal/fecal and skin 
microbiota28,38,39, which would not explain the prenatal bond of antibiotics with childhood 
obesity. However, studies40-45 have shown the presence of microorganisms in the amniotic 
fluid, in the umbilical cord blood, in the placental membrane, in meconium, and in the fetus, 
thus questioning the idea of sterility in the uterus. In this perspective, it is possible that the 
maternal-fetal exchange of microbiota may occur before birth. If that really happens, 
antibiotics used in the prenatal period can cross the placental barrier and enter fetal 
circulation, with a risk for childhood obesity. However, in the present study, the occurrence of 
infectious diseases during pregnancy was not associated to the studied outcome. Just like in 
the present study, another study with a sample from the same population10, but with a cross-
sectional design, did not observe statistically significant differences between nutritional status 
and type of delivery46. 

In relation to smoking during pregnancy, there is evidence of its association with 
childhood obesity, suggesting a greater direct intrauterine impact of maternal smoking 
compared to paternal or someone smoking in the house47,48. For children to present the 
problem prenatal exposure has to occur47-49. In addition, smoking is associated to several 
sociodemographic factors and lifestyle, and smokers have less healthy diets47. The effect of 
smoking on the risk of overweight in children is not clear, but the exposure of the fetus to 
nicotine has long-term effects on the control of consumption and eating habits50. However, 
the results of smoking cessation during pregnancy have not shown any important effects on 
childhood overweight50. In the present study, the higher frequency of smoking was not 
associated to an increased risk of overweight in children.  

Studies51-53 found an association between birth weight and childhood obesity. In the 
present study, this association was not observed. However, high birth weight has the potential 
to identify children at higher risk for obesity, which may be opportune to modify eating 
behaviors and control weight gain. 

The association between diabetes and childhood obesity is related to maternal obesity 
and excess weight gain during pregnancy54,55. Exposure to high concentration of glucose, 
fatty acids, and amino acids can compromise appetite regulation, energy balance, and body 
weight56. When comparing obese and non-obese mothers before pregnancy, obese mothers’ 
children were three times more likely to be overweight, a characteristic that persists in the 
child’s growth and development57. In the present study, no statistically significant 
associations were found. 

The variables that were shown to be statistically associated to the outcome in the 
bivariate analysis were: mother’s age during pregnancy, mother’s report of the occurrence 
of pregnancy problems, and the Apgar score in the first minute. Nonetheless, only one 
variable remained associated in the multivariate analysis. Children with Apgar scores under 
7 in the first minute were 36% more at risk of being overweight in school years. The 
literature does not present similar data that allows comparison. Although incipient and 
cautious, Barker’s hypothesis8 could be represented here. Further studies involving other 
populations and with larger samples are needed to continue exploring this possibility. It 
could be more appropriate to explain this association with the subjective meaning, for 
mothers, of what it means for their children to be born with less vitality. A child in this 
condition could offer greater protection on the part of the family, which, hypothetically, 
could be represented by more permissive attitudes, even related to a diet rich in sugars and 
fats. 

On the other hand, the genetic patterns of chronic diseases are transmitted by signals 
from epigenetics, which work by mechanisms that differ as to the content of information 
and influence cell physiology by means of positive or negative behavior58,59. Reproductive 
health seeks to understand which mechanisms can activate or deactivate parts of the genetic 
program. Organisms undergo two events of epigenetic reprogramming in development. The 
first, in gametogenesis, is a microenvironment with precision, which allows the 
transmission of information that will be inherited, important for epigenetic information 
specific to parents58,59. The second, in the pre-implantation of the embryo, which includes a 
series of decisions about the cell destiny at the beginning of development and is maintained 
by several cell divisions. Epigenetics plays a role in cellular memory during development60, 
but the environmental and metabolic conditions of pregnancy shape epigenetic 
reprogramming and influence health, the child’s life, and the etiology of diseases61-63. Thus, 
the transgenerational effects of epigenetics, when inherited from the third generation 
onwards, can no longer be described by direct environmental exposure64. Therefore, when 
studying childhood obesity incidence, relating it to the various etiological possibilities for 
coping with the world epidemic experienced is essential. There are different processes that 
preserve the memory of environmental impacts and probable interaction with other factors. 
A subnormal environment during preconception, pregnancy, childhood, and adolescence, 
critical periods for one’s development, can irreversibly predispose to risk factors for 
diseases in adulthood. If epigenetic marks are reversible, the consequences of changes in 
morphogenesis or in the cell may be irreversible61-63. 

The results of the present study, by not strongly showing the influence of prenatal 
factors, reinforce the proximal environmental aspects in determining overweight in children. 
The imbalance between calorie intake and expenditure, determined by diet, basal metabolism, 
and physical activity, remains the factor with the greatest explanatory power23-27. These 
factors, supported by the Life Course Approach9, which is based on the accumulation of risks 
during life, mainly highlight the interaction between biological and social factors in the 
different stages of life than the current lifestyle of people. 

Therefore, there is scientific evidence23-27 demonstrating that the course of life as from 
conception needs to be studied to identify risk or protective environments for the development 
of childhood obesity. Seen that, stating that unhealthy diets, physical inactivity, and smoking 
are confirmed risk behaviors is possible47,48,54-56. On the other hand, the biological, 
psychological, and social risk factors that involve both the pregnant woman and the child may 
have an important role in their determination23-27, although not confirmed in the present study. 
In addition, such conditions, when impacting both the beginning of life and its course, can 
have negative effects throughout it and affect the next generation’s health58-63. Globally, with 
the trend towards greater exposure to obesity risk factors at different stages of life, 
particularly in childhood, providing appropriate environments as from the beginning of life is 
of utmost importance. Effective interventions that extend beyond individual risk factors 
remain essential. Thus, together with the knowledge already accumulated, it is possible to 
understand that the determinants of overweight comprise a set of genetic, epigenetic, 
biological, behavioral, and environmental factors that can interrelate and potentiate each other 
as from the earliest stages of life. 

The results of the present study need to be interpreted with caution due to some 
limitations. First, sample size may have been insufficient to enable the phenomena to appear. 
Second, there was lack of data before and after an observation period, common in disease 
incidence studies. Third, considering this is a cohort with a mixed design, prenatal data were 
collected retrospectively in a recall way, which allows the introduction of measurement bias. 
The first anthropometric data were collected at the age of six, and obtaining information about 
weight up to that age was not possible, making it impossible to map the entire trajectory of 
children. Furthermore, this study may have underestimated the impact of socioeconomic 
status in determining overweight by including only a few variables, such as education and 
occupation of parents at birth. 

Overweight incidence in school years was high, accounting for 17.1%, whereas 
obesity, for 2.2%. Prenatal factors were not associated to incidence, with the exception of 
Apgar score in the first minute. 
