COVID-19-related challenges in dental education: experiences 
from Australia, Brazil, and the USA 
 
Karen Glazer Peres1,2, Peter Reher3, Ricardo Dias de Castro 4, Alexandre Rezende Vieira5 
1National Dental Research Institute Singapore, National Dental Centre Singapore, Singapore. 
Phone: +61 0439919326. karen.g.d.a.peres@ndcs.com.sg 
2 Oral Health ACP, Health Services and Systems Research Programme Duke-NUS Medical 
School, Singapore. Phone: +61 439919326. karen.g.d.a.peres@ndcs.com.sg 
3 School of Dentistry and Oral Health, Griffith University, Gold Coast, Australia. Phone: +61 
7 5678 0726. E-mail: peter.reher@griffith.edu.au 
4 Department of Clinical and Social Dentistry, Federal University of Paraiba, João Pessoa, 
Paraiba, Brazil. Phone: +55 083 3216-7742. E-mail: rcastro@ccs.ufpb.br 
5 Department of Oral Biology, University of Pittsburgh School of Dental Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. Phone: +1 412 383-8972. E-mail: alexandre_vieira@pitt.edu 
 
Karen G Peres: http://orcid.org/0000-0002-1730-2123 
Peter Reher: http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4444-125X 
Ricardo Dias de Castro: http://orcid.org/0000-0001-7986-7376 
Alexandre Rezende Vieira: http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3392-6881 
 
 
 
Correspondence to: 
A/Professor Karen Peres 
National Dental Research Institute Singapore  
National Dental Centre Singapore, Oral Health ACP 
Health Services and Systems Research Programme 
Duke-NUS Medical School 
5 Second Hospital Ave, Singapore 168938 
E-mail: karen.g.d.a.peres@ndcs.com.sg 
 
 
Abstract 
Aim: To describe the management of dental education in three dental schools during the 
COVID-19 crisis. Methods: Adopted strategies in the Federal University of Paraíba (UFPB), 
Brazil, University of Pittsburgh (UP), USA, and Griffith University (GU), Australia were 
detailed. Results: In the UFPB, all on-site teaching was suspended, and resources for 
distance learning set up as a supplementary semester to be available as face to face classes 
later. A protocol for clinical care followed safety measures recommended by Brazilian 
official health institutions. The adequacy of the physical structure, human resources, and 
personal protective equipment (PPE) acquisition for the return to clinical activities are 
currently under discussion. In the UP, learning activities were shifted to virtual teaching 
using lecture recordings and live sections. All elective patients care was postponed. Urgent 
dental cases were discussed via teledentistry. The physical layout of the dental clinics and 
pre-clinical laboratories were changed, allowing a safe distance between students. In the GU, 
all clinical and pre-clinical activities were cancelled, and theoretical activities were 
maintained online for all students. Several clinically based scenarios where created and 
delivered in the format of online problem-based learning. The reception area was redesigned, 
ensuring social distancing. Safety measures follow the Australia Dental Association. 
Conclusions: Dealing with dental education depends on the stage of the epidemic and the 
characteristics of each country. 
 
 
Introduction 
Coronaviruses (CoV) are a specific type of group virus which include ribonucleic acid 
(RNA) in its genetic material [1]. Their primary targets are epithelial cells of the respiratory 
and gastrointestinal tracts, which facilitates the transmission of the viral load through 
different ways such as fomites, airborne or faecal-oral [2]. In early January 2020, the -
Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention [3] reported a novel coronavirus (SARS-
COVID-2) as the causative agent of a human disease named COVID-19. Late January 2020, 
the World Health Organisation declared a public health emergency of international concern, 
and a global pandemic later was announced, in March 2020 [4]. As of 4 June 2020, COVID-
19 had affected 213 countries and territories around the world, translated in more than 6 
million cases and almost 400 thousand deaths worldwide [5].  
Nations have taken different measures to slow down the spread of the virus that causes 
COVID-19. Lockdown, shelter in place, stay at home orders, travel ban, and social 
distancing, for instance, were measures that dramatically impacted the globe both socially 
and economically. The physical distancing of one metre or more, wearing face masks for both 
health-care workers and the general public as well as eye protection are mechanisms already 
supported by findings from a recent systematic review and meta-analysis [6].  
One of the sectors hardest disrupted by the COVID -19 pandemic crisis was the area of health 
education. Dental education was affected significantly. Given the high degree of uncertainty 
about the natural history of the disease, and the need to protect the health of students, staff 
and patients, actions such as suspension of teaching, researching and other activities to 
campus were taken using a range of strategies, which varied across countries and the stage of 
the local epidemic curve. Moreover, practice preparation, such as the review of Personal 
Protective Equipment (PPE) protocols, the organisation of the pre and post clinical 
environment, and clinical dental procedures were discussed and implemented. Numerous and 
critical difficulties and challenges have arisen as a result of the measures adopted that will 
have lasting effects. Facing an unprecedented time in the dental education system worldwide, 
this is an excellent opportunity to share new experiences, learn and develop. 
This study aimed to describe and compare how three dental schools from different countries 
have managed experiences in dental education during the COVID-19 crisis. Australia, Brazil, 
and the USA have the pandemic spread at different times and magnitudes. As of this writing 
in early June 2020, USA and Brazil ranked first and second in the number of confirmed cases 
worldwide, respectively [5]. In Australia, the number of new cases rapidly increased and 
peaked in March 2020. Since mid-April, there has been a sustained and relatively low number 
of new cases reported daily, with less than 20 new cases per day since 22 April [7]. 
 
 
Methods 
Settings 
Brazil - Federal University of Paraíba, School of Dentistry 
Brazil is an upper-middle-income South American country, the fifth largest and the most 
populous nation globally, with a population of over 212 million [8]. It is the ninth economy in 
the world with 79th HDI position worldwide [9]. The number of Brazilian high education 
institutions surpasses 2,400, which includes 199 universities and 2,020 colleges, most of them 
(87.9%) are private [10]. Only 16.5% of young adults aged ≥ 25 years have a tertiary 
education level. There are 542 dental schools in Brazil, of which 58 are public and free of 
tuition fees [11]. The Federal University of Paraíba (UFPB), in Joao Pessoa, Northeast Brazil 
(Figure 1), offers undergraduate and postgraduate degrees in the dental field and has 
approximately 400 students. 
The USA – the University of Pittsburgh, School of Dental Medicine 
Ranked as the global largest economy, the USA is located in central North America with a 
population of over 300 million inhabitants [12]. The HDI index of 0.924 ranks the 13th global 
position [9]. When compared to most higher education systems around the world, the U.S. 
system is mostly independent of federal government regulation, and it is highly decentralized. 
The educational system receives funds from many public and private sources, including 
tuition, federal and state funds, as well as endowments [13]. Dental education in the USA is a 
professional training after a college degree. Students must obtain a bachelor’s degree at a 
university or college before applying to any of the 66 existing dental school. The University 
of Pittsburgh is one of four educational institutions where training in dentistry is offered in 
the Pennsylvania North-eastern state (Figure 1). There are nearly 400 dental students 
enrolled. 
Australia – Griffith University, School of Dentistry and Oral Health 
Australia is the largest country in Oceania and the sixth-largest in the world, with a relatively 
small population of nearly 26 million [14]. The country is highly developed with the world`s 
14th largest economy, raking the third position according to the Human Develop Index (HDI) 
of 0.939 [9]. The education sector plays an essential role in the Australian economy, with 43 
universities, out of which 40 are public. The Australian Government provides loans and 
subsidies to assist citizen students. Australia has 12 dental schools, 9 teaching Dentistry 
programs, and 3 teaching Oral Health Therapy. The School of Dentistry and Oral Health at 
Griffith University is located in Gold Coast, Queensland, east coast of Australia (Figure 1). 
The School has undergraduate degrees in Dentistry and Dental Technology, as well as post-
graduate training programs in several disciplines, and research degrees such as MPhil and 
PhD. The School has approximately 600 dental students, with 20% being international 
students. 
 
 
Results 
Strategies in dental education during the COVID-19 pandemic 
The Federal University of Paraíba, School of Dentistry  
After the WHO declared the COVID-19 pandemic, the Federal University of Paraíba 
suspended all on-site teaching, research, and service activities. For the return to teaching 
activities, the use of information and communications technology (ICTs) resources for 
distance learning was recommended, with the following considerations: 1) student access to 
the internet and computers; 2) training of teachers to use ICTs; 3) theoretical and practical 
nature of the curricular components. Remote teaching of theoretical curricular components 
was offered in all undergraduate programs; however, these were considered as a 
supplementary semester. Assessments were submitted online in a range of formats such as 
quizzes, essays, and video production. When returning to face-to-face activities, considering 
that some students do not have a satisfactory socioeconomic condition that supports the use 
of ICTs, the online curricular components offered must be made available again in the face to 
face classrooms.  
Immediately after suspension of face-to-face activities, a biosafety committee was formed, 
made up of academics and students of the dental school, to present a proposal to return to 
post-pandemic activities, including clinical care. A protocol for clinical care was elaborated 
considering safety measures recommended by Brazilian official health institutions [15], as 
well as scientific articles [16,17]. In general, the of personal protective equipment (PPE) such 
as masks N95 or PPF2, safety glasses, disposable caps and shoe covers, waterproof surgical 
apron, face shield, and procedure gloves were recommended, besides specificities detailed in 
table 1.  
The University of Pittsburgh, School of Dental Medicine 
The response to the pandemic came slow, but when it happened, colleges and universities in 
the United States suspended classes for a week. Learning activities were shifted to virtual 
teaching in the followed week, using a combination of lecture recordings and live sections 
with faculty and students connected at the same time. At the School of Dental Medicine, all 
research activities were suspended (except for the projects that could be considered essential 
for the COVID-19 effort) or, otherwise, could not be interrupted because of the employment 
of unique materials or supplies. Services such as administrative meetings were moved to be 
100% on-line. All elective patients care was postponed protecting staff and preserving PPE 
and patient care supplies. Urgent dental cases were discussed via teledentistry consultation 
until national guidelines were available from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
[18]. These cases were seen within weeks when protocols for urgent care were nationally 
released (Table 1). 
The forced period of isolation had an evident impact on dental students at the University of 
Pittsburgh. U.S. dental students are typically older than the corresponding students from 
Brazil. On average, they are four years older than Brazilian students, which cause a 
substantial financial investment in their education.  The full dental course at the University of 
Pittsburgh costs US$300,000 and, consequently, changes in how the learning was delivered 
to finish the semester due to COVID-19, created more anxiety. Online teaching was delivered 
with the offering of some additional contacts for guidance and emotional support. Besides 
teaching, other experiences such as research and service were profoundly affected as well. 
Griffith University, School of Dentistry and Oral Health 
When the pandemic started, Australia was one of the first countries to introduce strong 
regulations related to social distancing, travel restrictions, testing and tracking of infected 
patients. As such, the universities started to be closed from mid-March, cancelling all clinical 
and pre-clinical activities, maintaining online theoretical activities, such as seminars, lectures, 
and journal clubs. These activities required a steep learning curve by all students and 
academics, and platforms such as Microsoft Teams® and BlackBoard Collaborate ULTRA® 
became the main Learn &Teaching tools used at Griffith University. Several clinically based 
scenarios were created and delivered in the format of online problem-based learning (PBL) 
discussions. All exams in Semester 1 where delivered online.  
Throughout the pandemic, there was a strong collaboration between the main Dentistry 
regulatory bodies such as the Australian Dental Association (ADA), the Dental Board of 
Australia (DBA) and the Australian Council of Dental Schools (ACODS). A staged level of 
severity of restrictions was implemented by the ADA and endorsed by the other entities and 
supported by State and Federal Governments [19]. The restrictions ranged from level 1 to 
level 5, and staid on level 3 for March and April. This meant that only dental emergencies 
could be treated including management of infections, pain, and bleeding, without the use of 
aerosols (Table 1). During this time, the School created a minimal roster with clinical dentists 
and academics only, without students. From late-April, the government approved a reduction 
to ADA level 2, and finally, at the end of May, it went down to level 1. Although these rules 
apply to all dentists in the country, the Dental schools have just recently initiated their “return 
to clinic” strategy, and most are starting at level 2 restrictions [20]. 
 
 
Discussion 
Back to “normal” – how and when? 
At the point of writing this paper (mid-June 2020), countries were facing different epidemic 
realities of the COVID-19 crisis. Brazil was close to the peak of its epidemic curve, the US 
was lowering the curve, and Australia had flattened it, reaching a level of the almost 
complete elimination of new cases. It is therefore interesting to compare how each country is 
planning and executing their return to “normal” clinical teaching in Dentistry.   
Brazil - Federal University of Paraiba, School of Dentistry 
The return to face-to-face activities, including pre-clinical and clinical teaching, is preceded 
by an extensive discussion and elaboration of protocols for the establishment of a new 
routine. The Brazilian Dental Education Association (ABENO) promotes a national debate. It 
proposes the creation of dental infection control or biosafety commission in each educational 
institution to carry out the diagnosis, infection control, and continuing education for all 
people involved. In public institutions, like the Federal University of Paraíba, the main 
challenges are related to the adequacy of the physical structure, availability of human 
resources, and acquisition of materials for the personal protection of teachers, students, and 
oral health technicians. The preparation of a strategic plan for the return to activities is 
expected, considering epidemiological indicators and occupancy rate of hospital beds for 
treatment of COVID 19. 
The University of Pittsburgh, School of Dental Medicine 
After the end of the spring term (which runs from January through April), the summer term 
(April-July) continued to offer classes online, and preparations were made for offering 
clinical experiences to the students who are in the treatment care phase of their training. The 
combinations of recorded clinical procedures and more in-depth discussions of clinical 
scenarios were offered to provide some experience to the students while all waited for 
authorization from the state regarding restabilising clinical activities. The physical layout of 
the dental clinics and pre-clinical laboratories were changed to minimize risks of COVID-19 
allowing for students to be at a safe distance from others while working. The plan is for 
resuming these activities within a month. 
Australia – Griffith University, School of Dentistry and Oral Health 
Discussions regarding how we should return to our pre-clinical and clinical activities started 
in April. From that point, it was already clear that regardless as to when we would return, key 
aspects would have to be observed, such as social distancing, review of infection control 
practices and specific COVID-19 assessment of patients and staff. Social distancing in 
Australia was determined as 1.5m, with no more than one person per 4 sqm of the room area. 
These basic principles meant that we had to do a very complex revision of our timetables and 
clinical sessions, as most classes would necessarily have to be “double taught”. Most clinics 
had a 6-chair layout with one supervisor, and with the new model, we could only use three 
chairs, and the supervisor would look after two clinics. We had to reduce the length of the 
sessions from 3 h to 2h and 30 min, and by doing so we managed to have four sessions a day 
(from 7:30 am to 7:30 pm), instead of the regular three sessions per day. Although we could 
fit all students, overall, there was still an inevitable reduction of the number of patients seen 
per student, as we did not have enough physical space to double all sessions. This change in 
the timetable affected the entire school and required changes to the Prosthetics Lab as well as 
the Simulation Lab, ensuring we all followed this new timetable.  
 
We are probably one of the first dental schools in the world to have started to have 
clinical activities with students. This was a staged approach, with Professional Dentists 
beginning on 25 May, PG students on 1 June, and UG students on 8 June. The reception area 
was redesigned, reduced to 1/3 of its capacity ensuring social distancing. A pre-entry 
checkpoint was created for all patients, staff and students before entering the clinic 
(temperature check, travel and COVID-19 history, hand sanitiser and band wrist 
identification). PPE has been reinforced, with the use of scrubs covered with disposable 
gowns, goggles, head nets and masks used at all times (N95 available). All patients and staff 
had to do a mouth wash (hydrogen peroxide) before treatment, and the use of rubber dam and 
high-volume suction were reinforced. The school started on ADA level 2; however, we are 
moving to level 1 from 15 June, following the same staged approach [19]. We are happy to 
report that so far, the clinical operation is working well, patients are pleased to be back and 
appreciative of the extra precautions implemented, and staff and students feel safe and 
engaged to be back on campus. 
 
 
Final Considerations 
Numerous and critical difficulties have arisen as a result of the pandemic for individuals, 
communities and institutions that will have long-lasting effects. Our students face disruption 
to their education and career; our professional colleagues will be challenged rebuilding their 
practices, while staff at all Dental Schools are experiencing various hardships. However, we 
believe that our response to these difficulties has been a challenging and rewarding learning 
experience. The way we practise dentistry and deliver dental education has changed 
significantly as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, and we should share our experiences and 
learn from each other. We should take this scenario as an excellent opportunity for all of us to 
review our clinical practices, our biosafety, and be forever stimulated to try new ways to 
teach to the next generation of dentists. The future of dental education needs to incorporate 
the role of new pandemics within their accreditation requirements. 
 
 
Contributor’s Statements: 
Karen Glazer Peres conceptualized the study, drafted the initial manuscript, and approved the 
final manuscript as submitted. 
Peter Reher contributed to the methods and discussion sections, critically review the 
manuscript, and approved the final manuscript as submitted. 
Ricardo Dias Castro contributed to the methods and discussion sections, critically review the 
manuscript, and approved the final manuscript as submitted. 
Alexandre Rezende Vieira contributed to the introduction and discussion section, critically 
review the manuscript, and approved the final manuscript as submitted. 
All authors approved the final version of the manuscript and agree to be accountable for all 
aspects of the work. 
 
 
References 
1- Woo PC, Huang Y, Lau SK, Yuen KY. Coronavirus genomics and bioinformatics 
analysis. Viruses 2010/; 2(8):1804–20. doi: 10.3390/v2081803 
2- Decaro N. Gammacoronavirus. In: Tidona CA, Darai G. The Springer Index of 
Viruses. Springer.; 2011, pp. 403-13. 
3- World Health Organization. Novel coronavirus –China. Geneva, Switzerland: World 
Health Organization. Available from: https://www.who.int/csr/ don/12-january-2020-
novel-coronavirus-china/en/. [Accessed on June 12, 2020]. 
4- World Health Organization (WHO). Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) Pandemic. 
Geneva: WHO; 2019. Available from: 
https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019. [Accessed on 
June 12, 2020].  
5- Johns Hopkins University & Medicine. 2020 Coronavirus Resource Center. Available 
from: https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html. [Accessed on June 3, 2020].  
6- Chu DK, Akl EA, Duda S, Solo K, Yaacoub S, Schünemann HJ. COVID-19 
Systematic Urgent Review Group Effort (SURGE) study authors. Physical 
Distancing, Face Masks, and Eye Protection to Prevent Person-To-Person 
Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19: A Systematic Review and Meta-
Analysis. 2020; S0140-6736(20)31142-9. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31142-9 
7- Australian Government, Department of Health. Available from: 
https://www.health.gov.au/news/health-alerts/novel-coronavirus-2019-ncov-health-
alert/coronavirus-covid-19-current-situation-and-case-numbers. [Accessed on June 3, 
2002]. 
8- World Bank. Available from: https://data.worldbank.org/country/brazil. [accessed on 
June 5, 2020]. 
9- Human Develop Report. Available from: http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/human-
development-index-hdi. [Accessed on June 5, 2020].  
10- Brasil. Ministério da Educação. 2020. Cadastro Nacional de Cursos e Instituições de 
Educação Superior. Available from: http://emec.mec.gov.br/ [Accessed on June 7, 
2020]. 
11- Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística (IBGE). Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra 
de Domicílios Contínua. Educação 2018. 2019. Available from: 
https://biblioteca.ibge.gov.br/visualizacao/livros/liv101657_informativo.pdf. 
[Accessed on June 7, 2020]. 
12- USA census. Population Clock. U.S. and World Population Clock. Available form: 
https://www.census.gov/popclock/ [Accessed on May 24, 2020]. 
13- USA Funding, education. Available from: https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-
and-analysis/issue-briefs/2015/06/federal-and-state-funding-of-higher-education. 
[Accessed on June 9, 2020]. 
14- Australian Bureau Statistics. Available from: 
https://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/mf/3101.0. [Accessed on June 5, 
2010]. 
15- Brasil. Ministério da Saúde. 2020. Painel coronavirus. Available from: 
https://covid.saude.gov.br. [Accessed on June 7, 2020].  
16- Peng X, Xu X, Li Y, Cheng L, Zhou X, Ren B. Transmission routes of 2019-nCoV 
and controls in dental practice. Int J Oral Sci 2020; 12, 9. doi: 10.1038/s41368-020-
0075-9. 
17- Lo Giudice R. The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS CoV-2) 
in dentistry. Management of biological risk in dental practice. Int J Environ Res 
Public Health 2020; 28:17(9):3067. doi: 10.3390/ijerph17093067.  
18- Centers for Disease Control. Available from: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-
ncov/hcp/framework-non-COVID-care.html. [Accessed on June 11, 2020]. 
19- Australia Dental Association. Available on 
https://success.ada.org/~/media/CPS/Files/Open%20Files/ADA_COVID19_Dental_E
mergency_DDS.pdf?_ga=2.253879752.110187285.1584496315-
1622146531.1565271894. [Accessed on June 11, 2020]. 
20- Australia Dental Association. Service Restrictions in COVID-19. Available on 
https://www.ada.org.au/Campaign/COVID-19/Managing-COVID-19/Practice-
Resources/Dental-restriction-Levels/ADA-dental-restriction-levels-in-COVID-19-
Publishe.aspx. [Accessed on June 9 2020]. 
 
Tables and Figures 
Figure 1: Location of dental schools-related to the study 
Table 1: Restricted services and recommendations followed during the COVID-19 pandemic 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 1: Restricted services and recommendations followed during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Australia1 
Brazil2 
USA3 
ADA Restrictions Covid-19 
Services that can be performed:  
Recommendations 
Framework for provision health care 
Level 1-All dental treatments using standard precautions for 
people who do not meet epidemiological or clinical risk 
factors for COVID-19 infection transmission. 
• Cleaning the surfaces of environment for clinical 
care with 1% sodium hypochlorite or 70% alcohol. 
• Minimum distance of 2 meters between each dental 
chair, with the presence of mechanical barriers 
between them. Pre-consultation with patients from 
telephone contact to collect information on possible 
signs and symptoms caused by COVID 19 in a 
period of up to 14 days before appointment. Patients 
will be seen at previously established times and will 
be evaluated for body temperature.  
• Definition of procedures for dressing and removing 
PPE in environments suitable for these purposes. To 
prevent cross-contaminations, dental care must be 
provided in the proportion of one teacher for each 
pair of students, who will treat only one patient per 
day shift, thus enabling the disinfections of the 
clinical environment between appointments. This 
new routine must involve expanding the number of 
classes for each curricular component.  During the 
dental treatment, in general, the following should be 
considered: 1) use of high-power suction systems to 
reduce the spread of aerosols to the environment; 2) 
preferential drying of the tooth / cavity mouthpiece 
with gauze or cotton, avoiding the use of the air jet 
of the triple syringe; 3) prioritization of chemical-
mechanical surgical techniques, when possible; 4) 
preferential use, when possible, of absorbable suture 
Highly likely potential for patient harm: Dental 
emergencies. Patient care should be provided without 
delay under any level of community transmission 
(CT). Large scale CT: consider shift care to facilities 
less affected by COVID-19. Minimal to moderate CT: 
consider if the facility can provide patient care rather 
than transferring them to facilities less affected by 
COVID-19. No to minimal CT: resuming regular 
practice. 
 
Unlikely potential for patient harm: routine primary 
or specialty care. Large scale CT: if care cannot be 
delivered remotely, consider deferring until CT 
decreases. Utilize telehealth if appropriate. Minimal 
to moderate CT: if care cannot be delivered remotely, 
work towards expanding in person care as needed 
with priority for at risk populations and those whose 
care, if continually deferred, would 
more likely result in patient harm. Utilize telehealth if 
appropriate. No to minimal CT: Resume regular care 
practices while continuing to utilize 
telehealth if appropriate. 
Level 2-Provision of dental treatments that are unlikely to 
generate aerosols or where aerosols generated have the 
presence of minimal saliva/blood due to the use of rubber 
dam. This includes: examinations, simple non-invasive 
fillings without use of high-speed handpieces, restorative 
procedures using high speed handpieces only provided with 
the use of rubber dam, non-surgical extractions, hand 
scaling (no use of ultrasonic scalers), medical management 
of soft tissue presentations (such as ulcers), TMD 
dysfunction management, denture procedures, preventative 
procedures such as the application of topical remineralising 
agents e.g. fluoride, orthodontic treatment. 
Level 3-Only dental treatments that do not generate 
aerosols, or where treatments generating aerosols is limited 
to: management of patients with acute dental pain e.g. 
endodontic treatment under rubber dam, or extraction, 
management of significantly damaged upper front teeth 
(e.g. due to trauma, with restorative treatment provided 
under rubber dam, soft tissue pathology e.g. ulcers, 
management of complex medically compromised patients 
with dental concerns which may compromise their systemic 
disease, management of those at a higher risk of rapid 
progression of dental disease due to socioeconomic or 
cultural factors, management of patients referred by a 
medical practitioner for medically necessary dental care 
Level 4-Only the following dental treatments are to be 
managed: swelling of the face, neck or mouth, dental 
trauma causing change in the position of teeth, soft tissue 
damage and/or significant pain, significant bleeding, 
difficulty opening the jaw and/or swallowing, referral from 
a specialist medical practitioner for assessment or 
management of a patient receiving urgent medical care for 
medically necessary dental care, dental pain causing loss of 
sleep, ulcers persisting for 3 + weeks 
threads; 5) use of extraoral radiographs, such as 
panoramic radiography or computer tomography, 
avoiding stimulation of salivation and coughing 
when taking intraoral radiography; 6) structural 
adequacy of the physical environment for clinical 
care. 
Level 5-No routine dental treatment provided. All patients 
with acute dental concerns to be directed to emergency care 
centres. 
1 Australia Dental Association. Dental Service Restrictions in COVID-19. Australian Dental Association, 25 March 2020. Available from: https://www.ada.org.au/Campaign/COVID-
19/Managing-COVID-19/Practice-Resources/Dental-restriction-Levels/ADA-dental-restriction-levels-in-COVID-19-Publishe.aspx Available on June 8, 2020] 
2 Dental School of Federal University of Paraíba. Protocol of Biosafety of Dental School in Coping with COVID 19. 2020.   
3 Centers for Disease Control. Available from: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/framework-non-COVID-care.html. [Accessed on June, 11 2020]. 
 
