The novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) belongs to a group responsible for causing acute respiratory syndromes 
that can vary from mild symptoms to severe conditions, resulting in hospitalization, need for mechanical 
ventilation, and significant mortality rate [1]. Despite respiratory impairment, other systemic symptoms may 
be manifested, such as neurological, gastrointestinal and musculoskeletal disorders [2].

Although little is known about the long-term physical consequences of COVID-19, patients who need 
mechanical ventilation in the most acute phase of disease can experience serious side effects, developing 
the so-called post-intensive care syndrome, which affects survivors of all ages. This syndrome is primarily 
characterized by  prolonged disability, with muscle dysfunction, fatigue, pain and dyspnea as secondary 
effects [3]. A second very common consequence in critically ill patients is ICU-acquired weakness, related to 
immobility, suboptimal glycemic control, and iatrogenic use of steroids and neuromuscular blocking agents. 
Other possible subsequent changes are critical illness polyneuropathy and myopathy. Less common physical 
sequelae of prolonged immobility may also occur, including cardiorespiratory deconditioning, postural 
instability, venous thromboembolism, muscle shortening, contractures (myogenic, neurogenic, arthrogenic) 
and pressure injuries [4].

In order to limit the severity of sequelae resulting from the hospitalization, it is essential that the physical 
therapist still works during the hospital phase, at the earliest stage of the disease, which will promote faster 
functional recovery and accelerate the discharge process. In some cases, in which the infection generates a 
productive cough, the physiotherapist conducts bronchial hygiene that allow the elimination of secretions 
and help to reduce respiratory distress. In other situations in which there is dry and non-productive cough, 
which is much more frequent with COVID-19, respiratory physical therapy may not be necessary [5]. However, 
as the role of physical therapists in the acute phase of disease is not restricted to the respiratory system, 
this professional remains indispensable even in this phase, conducting exercises and mobilizations that 
significantly minimize musculoskeletal deficits resulting from prolonged immobilization.

In non-severe patients, coronavirus disease can also have long-lasting consequences. As an effective 
treatment against the virus has not yet been discovered, in addition to hygiene care, social isolation is still 
the most recommended option by the World Health Organization to contain the rapid spread of the virus and 
reduce the burden on healthcare systems. On the other hand, this measure may further accentuate another 
pandemic with which the world has been living for many years: physical inactivity and sedentary behavior [6].

Even though it is not associated with COVID-19, social isolation is a contributing factor to the appearance 
of musculoskeletal symptoms, such as myofascial pain and arthralgias, especially those linked to autoimmune 
diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, spondylitis and systemic lupus erythematosus. Social restriction may 
also increase the symptoms of patients with fibromyalgia, as it intensifies anxiety and stress [7 - 9]. In this 
context, a physical therapist who works with musculoskeletal disorders is faced with two complications: 
patients who already had physical limitations having to deal with lower amounts of exercise and less physical 
therapy resources [10], and the unpredictable response of recovered patients from COVID-19 in the medium 
to long term.

In order to minimize such impacts, the professional councils of physical therapy in Brazil have released 
the services of teleconsultation, teleconsulting and telemonitoring as applicable and reproducible tools 
to allow supervision and care for patients who need clinical intervention [11]. Physical activity reduces 
stress, improves self-esteem, cardiorespiratory capacity, muscle strength and coordination, prevents frailty, 
sarcopenia and dinapenia, in addition to minimizing the risk of falls and cognitive decline in the elderly [12]. 
Monitoring of exercises, postural and functional guidelines, as well as alerting patients with chronic diseases 
about respecting the principles of energy conservation can be fundamental resources to avoid the emergence 
of a critical state in these patients, as well as the appearance of symptoms not previously shown [13]. In 
this sense, rehabilitation professionals have a fundamental role in the isolation period, helping patients 
to optimize functional independence and improving quality of life, in addition to facilitating a subsequent 
community reintegration [4].

Studies carried out with patients with SARS (severe acute respiratory syndrome) by the oldest form of 
coronavirus showed reduced cardiorespiratory capacity, musculoskeletal limitation and reduced quality 
of life even after the end of the disease. This shows the need for recovery of these patients regarding their 
functional capacity [14]. The individuals continued to show high levels of stress, depression and anxiety even 
one year after the end of the disease. Other viral diseases that cause SARS are described in the literature as 
generating long-term pulmonary disability and psychological impairment even two years after discharge. 
Scholars warn that "the long-term effects of infectious disease should not be ignored" [15].

For improvement in symptoms, monitoring by the physical therapist is important, as well as an intensive 
physical rehabilitation program proposed for these patients, with variable periods from 6 months to 2 years. 
Analyzing the reality of patients with COVID-19 and  SARS, it is clear that they may have a need for therapeutic 
support also in chronic phases or after the disease is cured [12].

Thus, it is concluded that a new sphere of clinical monitoring of these patients is awaken for physical 
therapist professionals. The need to promote the return to functionality of patients cured by COVID-19, 
as well as the physical recovery of the population in social isolation, will be growing demands, which will 
require physical therapists working outside the hospital to seek improvement and recovery of patients who 
will appear in healthcare services after the first cycles of pandemic caused by SARS-Cov-2.
