The first confirmed case of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Brazil and 
Latin America was reported on February 26, 2020, in São Paulo. The outbreak 
of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has 
placed unprecedented strain on health-care services worldwide. Asymptomatic 
health-care workers (HCW) are a potential source of SARS-CoV-2 transmission, 
especially to immunocompromised Oncology patients. Screening of these 
HCWs may help contain transmission and isolate only those who require it. 

At Centro de Terapia Oncológica (CTO), an Oncology clinic in Petrópolis, RJ —
Brazil, all HCWs were screened for SARS-CoV-2 in order to isolate those who 
were asymptomatic/symptomatic and positive for the virus. They were all tested 
through IgM/IgG rapid testing and those who had symptoms were also tested 
with nasopharyngeal swabs for reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction 
(RT-PCR) tests besides IgM/IgG reactivity. 

Amongst the 60 tested employees, 4 were positive for SARS-CoV-2 and were 
isolated. This method may be useful for health-care services to detect asymp-
tomatic HCW and maintain workers’ and patients’ health, as transmission prob-
ability could be reduced while avoiding becoming short-staffed during this time 
of crisis. 

Testing, diagnosing and isolating is the key to controlling the spread of Severe 
Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), and its clinical syn-
dromic manifestations known as coronavirus disease (COVID-19), according to 
the World Health Organization1. Asymptomatic health-care workers (HCWs) are 
an underestimated potential source of infection and are worthy of testing2. 

At present, Brazil has 85,380 (30/04/20) confirmed cases3 and 5,901 (30/04/20) 
deaths3; sub notification and sub-testing due to social distancing and lack of 
testing kits compromise the data, indicating that the published numbers do not 
faithfully represent Brazil’s reality. In the meantime, Rio de Janeiro (RJ) state 
registered 9,453 (30/04/20) diagnosed patients3 and 854 (30/04/20) deaths3.  

Centro de Terapia Oncológica (CTO) is a Oncology clinic in Petrópolis, country-
side of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Chemotherapy infusions are about 565 monthly 
alone, not considering hormone therapy treatments. From January until the end 
of March 2020, around 7,291 outpatients consultations were performed at this 
oncology center. 

While there are data suggesting that chemotherapy-treated patients with cancer 
are at risk for severe complications of influenza4,5, it is unclear how this might 
apply to COVID-19. A recent study has reported increased incidence and mor-
bidity of COVID-19 in patients with cancer6, but those findings were directly 
challenged by others7. Preliminary data by Zhang et al have shown a relatively 
high mortality of 8 of 28 (29%) hospitalized patients with COVID-19 who were 
previously diagnosed with cancer8.  

Given that asymptomatic transmission has been well documented18-22, this dis-
cussion aims to appoint the necessity of mass testing of both symptomatic and 
asymptomatic HCWs, in order to avoid workforce necessary quarantine, reduce 
spread in asymptomatic or mild cases and protect the health of HCWs and pa-
tients. 

Between 09 and 29 April of 2020, 60 HCWs of CTO were tested for COVID-19; 
this number represents the total number of employees at the clinic. All HCW 
were tested through IgM/IgG rapid testing by near-patient lateral flow devices, 
while nasopharyngeal swabs and real-time polymerase-chain-reaction (RT-
PCR) for SARS-CoV-2 were added as a secondary investigational method 
amongst symptomatic HCWs (e.g., fever, cough, shortness of breath, or sore 
throat). 

The test results produced two main outcomes: (1) Asymptomatic and/or symp-
tomatic positive IgM results and/or positive RT-PCR were quarantined immedi-
ately for 14 days; (2) HCW with negative serology and no symptoms were in-
structed to maintain protective measures and personal protection equipment 
(PPE); (3) HCW with indeterminate IgM results were re-tested after one week 
accompanied by an infectious diseases physician’s guidance. 

In total, all 60 employees were tested, 61 IgM/IgG tests were done (considering 
the one HCW who had to be re-tested) and 1 nasopharyngeal swabs for re-
verse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) testing, totalizing 62 
tests. Flowchart 1 illustrates the testing outline. 

A total of 4 HCW tested positive among 62 tests on 28 April 2020. They were all 
immediately quarantined for 14 days and represent almost 7% of the service’s 
total workforce (4 out of 60 HCWs). Out of the 4 positive cases, 2 were female, 
with 60 years or more, and the remaining 2 were men aged between 30 and 42 
years; 3 of these HCW were asymptomatic and only 1 had symptoms of the 
disease. 

Among the 3 asymptomatic HCWs, 2 had positive IgM and negative IgG results 
and 1 had positive IgM and IgG results; 1 had to be re-tested after one week 
due to an indeterminate result, testing positively for IgM and negatively for IgG. 
The only confirmed symptomatic case was IgM and IgG negative and RT-PCR 
positive.  

No HCW had only IgG positive results. 

Results are illustrated in Tables 1 and 2. 

Its urgent and important to address the impact of testing HCW at any given ser-
vice. In this case, detecting 3 asymptomatic and 1 symptomatic workers gave 
the service the opportunity to correctly isolate those who could put themselves 
and patients at risk, especially given the type of patients who frequent the CTO, 
who are mostly immunosuppressed to some degree. 

Furthermore, wide availability of testing for antibodies and the universal testing 
of HCW would be a game changer as it: 1) reduces in-hospital transmission16; 
2) reduces a potential source of asymptomatic ongoing transmission during a 
period of social distancing; 3) promotes the wellbeing of HCW ensuring that in-
fected colleagues are promptly tested and isolated17; 5) enables the service to 
isolate those who require it, avoiding being short-staffed due to self-isolation or 
widespread contamination of the HCW.  

Unfortunately, mass testing is still not a tangible reality for most healthcare ser-
vices in Brazil, especially in the public health sector, mainly due to financial rea-
sons.  

Finally, it manifests itself as a wise decision for healthcare services, particularly 
in the Oncology area, as it lessens disease transmission, reduces potencial 
high costs due to patient profile while allowing almost usual service functioning.  

As of April 30 2020, no CTO oncological patient was officially diagnosed with 
COVID-19 and mass testing of its HCW may have contributed to diminish 
asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 transmission and maintain the service’s patients 
health. 
