(Seed bank analysis and species similarity in the Guarnição da Aeronáutica de 
Pirassununga (São Paulo State, Brazil)). Riparian forests suffered from forest fragmentation, which 
in turn promote the change in the pattern of seed dispersion and modification of soil seed bank.  The 
aim of this study is to indicate the main species that make up the seed bank of a stretch of riparian 
forest of the Mogi Guaçu River continued to a fragment of semidecidual forest, located in the 
Guarnição da Aeronáutica de Pirassununga. It was delimited ten plots of 10 x 10 m. Four soil samples 
was collected by plot with a 25 x 25 cm template. Samples were packed in greenhouse for seed 
germination and monitored every 15 days for six months. Altogether, 494 individuals from 19 
families were sampled, distributed in 30 genera and 40 morphospecies. Diversity and distribution of 
species in the fragment is homogeneous and can be used as source of propagules for forest restoration.  

When the vegetation is located close to watercourses, it is renamed as riparian forest, defined 
as a transition area, extending between the limit of watercourses to the edge of higher lands, being 
strongly influenced by the water regimen, in addition to presenting high heterogeneity of habitats 
(Naiman et al. 2005).  

The fragmentation of forest formations, which are isolated stains of forests enveloped by areas 
that have suffered anthropic transformation, can generate negative edge effect and also the isolation 
of species (Cosgrove et al. 2018). Fragmentation can also cause change in the pattern of seed dispersal 
of a certain area (Cordeiro & Howe 2003), altering the maintenance of genetic diversity and gene 
flow (Wang & Smith 2002). Forest formations such as riparian forests along the course of water are 
important for maintenance of the gene flow, since they interconnect populations affected by 
fragmentation (Kageyama & Gandara 2001). In addition, they contribute to the stabilization of 
margins of watercourse, acting as natural filterers of nutrients and agrochemicals, intercepting and 
absorbing solar radiation and providing shelter and food for aquatic and terrestrial fauna (Sabino & 
Castro 1990). 

The seed bank may present changes in its composition because it is formed by both seeds from 
the fragment individuals themselves and by dispersers from other areas (Bossuyht & Honnay 2008). 
The seed bank is a stock of viable, non-germinated seeds, present in the ground, and can germinate 
within a short time, or remain in a state of latency until optimal conditions arise for germination 
(Martins 2009). 

From the analysis of the stock of the seed bank, it is possible to opt for better strategies 
regarding the management for native forests or restoration, as well as being used as an ecological 
indicator for evaluation and monitoring of regeneration in degraded ecosystems (Neto et al. 2010, 
2014, Bargoena et al. 2020, Costa et al. 2020). 

One of the biggest challenges today is the conservation of the remaining forest fragments 
(Loyola 2014), since Brazil holds one of the largest biodiversity on the planet (Forzza et al. 2012). 
The lack of information about where efforts should be concentrated and what strategies of restoration 
should be taken are often an obstacle to biodiversity conservation. In this sense, studies on the seed 
bank in remaining areas can provide important information about their state of conservation and for 
restoration actions in their surroundings, with the starting point which are the main vegetable species 
present there. Thus, the objective of the present study was to indicate the main species that make up 
the seed bank of a stretch of riparian forest of the Mogi Guaçu River continued to a fragment of 
semidecidual forest, located in the Guarnição da Aeronáutica de Pirassununga (São Paulo State, 
Brazil). 

Characterization of the study área - This study was conducted in a forest fragment located in the 
Guarnição da Aeronáutica de Pirassununga (FAYS), in latitude 21°59’39,98” S and longitude 
47°20’12,73” W, in the municipality of Pirassununga (São Paulo State, Brazil) (figure 1). 

FAYS contains about 2608 hectare (ha) corresponding to the forest fragments of lowland, 
brazilian savanna (cerrado), semidecidual forest, riparian forest and forestry of Eucalyptus spp. and 
Pinus spp. The climate is characterized as Cwa (Rolim et al. 2007), with hot and rainy summers, 
while winters are dried. The average temperature of the year 2018 was 21.90 ° C, while the average 
annual pluviometry registered was 1291 mm (Universidade de São Paulo 2020). 

The study fragment corresponds to an area of riparian forest in transition with semidecidual 
forest of approximately 140 ha (figure 2), located at 620 m altitude, north of FAYS, near the Water 
Treatment Station, adjacente to the Mogi Guaçu River. It is formed by the Residual Franca / Batatais 
highlands, composed of the intrusive Serra Geral, containing Typical Red Dystrophial Latosol, 
moderate to prominent, with clay or very clayey, very deep and softly wavy relief (LV11) (Rossi 
2017). 

Sampling -  To sample the seed bank were marked five plots (10 × 10 meters (m)), located 5 m from 
the Mogi Guaçu River (R) and a minimum distance of 30 m between them and five plots also 10 × 
10 m, located approximately 30 m from the Mogi-Guaçu River (I). Splots I and R were numbered 
from one to five, wherein the R1 and I1 plots were marked at a distance of 250 m after the Water 
Treatment Station in order to minimize its influence on the delimited plots. For the measurement of 
the distance from the entrance to the fragment to the beginning of the plots, as well as the geographical 
position of each splot (figure 3), a Global Positioning System (GPS) of the GARMIN Mark 20x model 
was used. 

Seed bank - The methodology of this study was defined from the analysis of several articles. We 
observed that the sampling methodology varied widely between studies, especially in relation to the 
size of the plots. However, the use of a quadratic template of 25 cm x 25 cm, collecting only at a 
depth of 5 cm, is unanimous among the different articles analyzed (Braga et al. 2008; Martins et al. 
2008; Martins 2009 ; Franco et al. 2012; Cerón 2015; Correia & Martins 2015; Kunz & Martins 
2016). Therefore, in an attempt to include a greater number of seeds, we chose to remove the soil at 
a depth of 0-10 cm, as will be detailed below. 

The sampling method in the 10 plots was adapted from Braga et al. (2016), consisting of the 
collection of four samples per splot, with the aid of a 25 cm x 25 cm template. The samples were 
collected in September 2018 during the transition from the dry season to the rainy, since it is the 
period in which it is possible to sample greater diversity of species from the seed bank analysis (Braga 
et al. 2016). 

From the recommendations of Braga et al. (2016), each sample was removed the ground to a 
depth of 10 cm, in two steps. The first was the removal of the soil of 0-5 cm, being called upper, and 
in the second, withdrew in the depth of 5-10 cm, called below. Samples of the two depths were packed 
in different plastic bags. After collecting the samples were arranged in plastic trays, first pouring the 
lower, covering it with the upper and subsequently, taken to germination in the shading of 60% and 
two three-minute daily irrigations through microspersors. 

The seedlass emergency method (Simpson et al. 1989) was used for seed bank analysis, 
monitoring them every 15 days for six months. For the best identification of individuals, those who 
presented an arbustive and arboreal character were peaked to tubes to develop. For the identification 
of the seedlings some species identification guides, such as Lorenzi (2014) and Brancalion & 
Nogueira (2016) were used. The exsiccates of the seedlings of the recognized species were made, 
deposited in the herbarium of Universidade Federal de São Carlos, Campus Araras. 

Statistical analysis - Through the Software Past 3.0 (Hammer & Harper 2006), the total number of 
species, species diversity through the Shannon-Weaver (H') index and the equality rate of Pielou (J) 
(Krebs 2007) were observed. The T test was used to ascertain if the H 'values differed from each other 
(p <0.05). 

Altogether, 494 individuals from 19 botanical families were sampled, distributed in 30 genera 
and 40 morphospecies (table 1). Among the individuals identified at least at the family level, the 
greatest diversity of species corresponds to Asteraceae (17.5%), followed by Moraceae (12.5%), 
Solanaceae (12.5%) and Urticaceae (7.5% ). Some individuals had no confirmed identification at the 
level of genus or species, since they were not in reproductive state and the characteristics in vegetative 
stage observed were not conclusive for safe identification. 

Most species of Asteraceae have anemocory and herbaceous habit (Silva et al. 2019), in 
addition to having many adaptive abilities, allowing them to occur in different ecosystems (Beretta 
et al. 2008). The data obtained here coincide with some studies whose species richness indicates that 
Asteraceae is expressive in areas of semideciduous forest (Nóbrega et al. 2009, Franco et al. 2012, 
Silva et al. 2019). It is important to note that Asteraceae is one of the largest families of angiosperms 
in number of species, with anemochoric dispersion and represented in practically all plant formations 
in the globe (Lorenzi 2014), which partially justifies its wide occurrence in the study area. 

Moraceae was the second in greater diversity of species, represented by five morphospecies 
and ten individuals, four of Ficus hirsuta Schott, three of Ficus guaranitica Chodat, and one of Ficus 
eximia Schott. Two individuals were not identified, named Ficus sp. 1 and Ficus sp. 2. Initially, 
considering the studies conducted by Mendonça-Souza (2006), he assumed that they were probably 
Ficus adhatodifolia Schott in Spreng. and Ficus obtusiuscula (Miq.) Miq. However, due to the 
overlap of vegetative characters between the two species, information about the pseudofruit will be 
needed to identify them. The seedlings obtained in the present were in a vegetative stage and therefore 
it was decided not to identify them at the species level. This genus contains the largest number of 
species in the family, with approximately 800 species, distributed in tropical, subtropical regions and 
hardly in temperate regions (Pelissari & Romaniuc-Neto 2013). The ecological balance of forests is 
largely aided by these species, because their pseudofruits, called syconium, serve as food for both 
mammals, birds and even fish, promoting a high range of dispersion of their seeds (Mendonça-Souza 
2006). Pollination of its flowers is carried out by wasps through a highly singular mutualistic 
relationship (Pelissari & Romaniuc-Neto 2013). 

Solanaceae was the third in species diversity. The individuals recognized in the present study 
are zoochoric, whose dispersion of their seeds is carried out by animals after ingestion (Ruschel et al. 
2008). We can cite the example of Solanum lycocarpum A.St-Hil., in which its main disperser is the 
guara wolf (Chrysocyon brachyurus Illiger, 1815) (Massara et al. 2012), an endangered mammal 
(Brazil 2014). In a work carried out by Müller (2016), the presence of the guara wolf was observed 
in the areas of the Guarnição da Aeronáutica de Pirassununga, which may be the disperser of the 
species in the study area. About 83% of all species of the Solanaceae family are dispersed by animals, 
being important in the structuring of forest communities (Albuquerque et al. 2006), colonizing open 
areas such as clearings, pastures and forest edges, as they are categorized as pioneers, needing direct 
sunlight to develop (Tabarelli et al. 1999).  

Finally, among the families with the greatest diversity of species is Urticaceae, represented in 
Brazil by 14 genera and about 116 species (Gaglioti et al. 2020). The species are characterized by 
their accelerated growth, short life cycle, reaching small and medium sizes (Parrota 1995). Most of 
these species need solar incidence in order to develop (Godoi & Tanaki 2005) and therefore border 
areas, as well as clearings in the interior of the forests, are regions with a high incidence of these 
species. Generally, in the soil of primary or secondary tropical forests there is a large number of seeds 
of this family, mainly those of Cecropia spp. (Lobova et al. 2003). 

Among the species recognized in the present study, a possible new occurrence was found for 
the São Paulo State, Combretum leprosum Mart., initially recognized for the semideciduous forest in 
Minas Gerais and Espírito Santo States (Flora do Brasil 2020 2021). Queiroz et al. (2021) also report 
the occurrence of C. leprosum seedlings for the same study area and bring evidence that suggest the 
occurrence of this species in the São Paulo State. Ongoing floristic studies may confirm the existence 
of adult individuals of C. leprosum in the study area, thus reinforcing the importance of studies on 
seed banks as an important tool for studying flora.  
 
As for the families with the largest number of individuals sampled, Urticaceae stands out with 
220 individuals (44.53%), distributed in three species, Cecropia glaziovii Snethl. (127 individuals), 
Cecropia pachystachia Trécul. (91 individuals) and Urera baccifera (L.) Gaudich. ex Wedd. (two 
individuals), followed by Cannabaceae, which presented 97 individuals (19.64%), belonging to Celtis 
sp. (50 individuals) and Trema micrantha (L.) Blume. (47 individuals). Solanaceae is the third in 
number of individuals, with 66 individuals (13.36%), belonging to Solanum americanum Mill. (47 
individuals), Solanum lycocarpum A. St-Hil. (nine individuals), Solanum mauritianum Scop. (seven 
individuals), Capsicum baccatum var. praetermissum (Heiser & P. G. Smith) Hunz. (two individuals) 
and Nicandra physalodes (L.) Gaertn. (one individual). From these data, it is possible to observe that 
most of the individuals obtained correspond to pioneer species, suggesting that in a possible 
transposition of soil for ecological restoration these individuals could contribute to the beginning of 
the recovery of the area, promoting soil cover and favoring the subsequent development propagules 
of non-pioneer species. 

The species cataloged in the seed bank are similar in 30% (12 species) with the floristic study 
that is being conducted in the same area as the present study. Thus, this similarity is consistent with 
the considerations of Marcante et al. (2009), who highlight that there is, in general, great 
differentiation between the composition of the seed bank and the vegetation itself. The diversity of 
vegetation tends to be greater than the diversity in the seed bank, as some dispersed seeds cannot 
persist for long periods in the soil in a dormant state, expecting optimal conditions for germination 
(Martins et al. 2015).  

Comparing with the study conducted by Neto et al. (2020), the dominant species proved to be 
quite similar, since in the seed bank of a mature semideciduous forest studied by these authors, the 
species that most emerged were T. micrantha (L.) Blume, Cecropia hololeuca Miq. and Solanum sp. 
such species are known to remain for a long time in the soil, requiring luminous areas for germination 
(Martins 2016). These species are essential for the regeneration of forests, as they are of primary 
nature and germinate in clearings and edges of the fragments (Pereira et al. 2010; Correia & Martins 
2015), being dispersed by animals, mainly birds (Ruschel et al. 2008). 

The largest number of pioneer individuals cataloged was in plots R, that is, the largest seed 
bank in this ecological group was cataloged at the edge of the fragment, which borders the Mogi 
Guaçu River. Forest areas adjacent to the watercourse have greater stratification of vegetation, 
allowing direct light to enter the area (Wallace et al. 2018), providing subsidy for the germination of 
species of this ecological group (Pereira et al. 2010; Correia & Martins 2015), which justifies the data 
obtained here. On the contrary, in plots I (farthest from the river), most non-pioneer species were 
cataloged. This can be explained by the fact that the areas furthest from the edge generally have a 
more homogeneous canopy, providing shade and humidity (Wallace et al. 2018), creating an optimal 
condition for such species to develop.  

Among all the species identified here, 55% have zoochoric dispersion syndrome, 30% 
anemochoric and 12.5% autochoric. Zoocory is extremely important for maintaining the interaction 
between fauna and flora, which in turn fosters the conservation and functionality of forest fragments 
(García et al. 2011). Generally, in conserved fragments and large areas of tropical forest, the zoocory 
dispersion is predominant (Sansevero et al. 2011, Jesus et al. 2012). As the study area is a fragment 
with little anthropic disturbance, we can say that it is in a good state of conservation, since more than 
half of the species have zoochoric dispersion syndrome. Other studies carried out on remnants of 
semideciduous forest also found values close to the present study, in which more than half of the 
sampled individuals have dispersion carried out by animals (Silva et al. 2019, Neto et al. 2020).  

Among ecological groups, 37.5% were classified as non-pioneers and 30% as pioneers. The 
rest of the species were not characterized according to the ecological group because they are 
herbaceous (22.5%), lianas (7.5%) and undetermined (2.5%). As for ecological groups, non-pioneer 
species represented the greatest diversity of species, but the largest number of registered individuals 
(83.6%) belongs to the group of pioneer species. According to some authors, most of the species 
found in the seed bank of semideciduous forests are pioneering in relation to ecological succession 
(Thompson 2000, Braga et al. 2016, Kunz & Martins 2016), as they are species that persist in the soil 
for a long time in a state of dormancy, in addition to high seed production (Martins et al. 2015). Non-
pioneer species do not usually form a population within the seed bank, because due to their large size, 
they cannot penetrate the litter layer and homogenize with the soil (Martins et al. 2015). Failure to 
incorporate large seeds into the soil promotes exposure to predator attacks (Silva et al. 2019), unlike 
seeds of pioneer species, which are buried more easily due to their small size, and are often protected 
from potential predators (Thompson 2000). In a study conducted by Nóbrega et al. (2009), also in the 
riparian forest of the Mogi Guaçu river, showed that 47% of the species that emerged from the seed 
bank are pioneers, in contrast to the present study, in which the emerged pioneers were 30%. In other 
studies, on the same phytophysiognomy, most of the emerged species were also characterized as 
pioneers (Franco et al. 2012). 

Regarding the occurrence in phytophysiognomy of the total number of species identified here 
(29), eleven have been reported for both semideciduous and riparian forest, seven species have 
reported for only semideciduous forest, two species have an occurrence reported only for riparian 
forest and nine species have no reported occurrence for these phytophysiognomies, according to Flora 
do Brasil 2020 (2021). Considering that the study area is a region of riparian forest continuous to a 
fragment of semideciduous forest, these data suggest that the influence of the fragment may have a 
great influence on the diversity of species that make up the riparian forest in question. It is important 
to highlight that this type of information is not always recorded on labels of exsiccates deposited in 
herbariums and that a significant part of the information about the occurrence in phytophysiognomies 
of the species of angiosperms present in Flora do Brasil 2020 (2021) may have been obtained in this 
way. This may justify the high number of species occurring in the present study not previously 
reported for semideciduous and riparian forest. 

Plots I presented an average in the number of species per plot slightly higher than the plots R, 
with values of 12.6 and 11.6 respectively. The diversity indices (H ') were higher in plots I, ranging 
from 1.98 to 2.53, while in plots R, they ranged between 1.74 and 2.02. Equability indices (J) were also 
higher in plots I, ranging from 0.82 to 0.95, while in plots R they ranged from 0.70 to 0.90 (table 2). 

The mean of Shannon's indexes in plots R was lower (1.90) when compared to plots I (2.20), 
but they were not significantly different by t test (p> 0.05). The Shannon-Weaver indexes for the two 
regions did not exceed the value of 3, and according to Souza et al. (2013), areas with values less 
than 3, are recognized as low diversity. Due to the forest structure being consistent in areas of mature 
forests, decreasing the seed rain, the diversity and density of the seed bank tend to decrease, causing 
the species that integrate the community to build a seedling bank (Souza et al. 2006).  

In a study conducted by Neto et al. (2020), the Shannon index was higher during the rainy 
season, with a value of 2.23, in which these samples were withdrawn between November and April 
2017. During the dry season, between the months of May and October of 2017, the index was 1.57, 
much lower than that found in the present study. On the other hand, in a study carried out by Piña-
Rodrigues & Aoki (2014), observing the deposition of seeds in fragments of semideciduous forest, it 
was found that the greatest deposition of seeds was at the end of the dry season and at the beginning 
of the wet season, comprising the September onwards. However, as several studies point out that the 
greatest deposition of seeds occurs at the end of the dry season and the beginning of the humid one 
(Braga et al. 2016), the collection was chosen in September to contemplate greater diversity. 
Therefore, one of the factors that influence the density and composition of species is the variation of 
climatic factors (Dalling 2002). 

The mean values of the Pielou index were between 0.78 for region R, and 0.87 for region I. 
Therefore, in region I the species are better distributed, with no ecological dominance, but it can be 
observed that the values index for both areas are high, resulting in a good distribution of species. 
When the value for the Pielou index is low, it is possible to assume that the total number of individuals 
belongs to a few species (Pinã-Rodrigues & Aoki 2014). In a study carried out on the edge of 
semideciduous forest, the Pielou index found was 0.79, considering the values of the present study 
(Bargoena et al. 2020). 

According to the administration of the Guarnição da Aeronáutica de Pirassununga, there are 
areas close to the Mogi Guaçu River in the Pirassununga Municipality that need to be restored (S.M. 
Barroso, personal communication). Therefore, we compared the species cataloged in the present study 
with the List of Species Specified for Ecological Restoration for Various Regions of the State of São 
Paulo (Barbosa 2017) and 18 of the species here reported are indicated for ecological restoration. 
This indicates that the studied fragment may come to be used as a source of propagules for degraded 
areas, which may be either by marking seed trees for collecting seeds, and later, by creating seedlings, 
or by transposing soil and or litter (Brancalion et al. 2015). 

Therefore, the conservation of forest fragments is extremely important for the maintenance of 
species, and later, their propagation. Even if there is no anthropic activity aimed at removing these 
propagules to other areas, the fauna alone already contributes to the dispersion. In a study by Neto et 
al. (2020), after analyzing the seed bank of abandoned eucalyptus areas, close to preserved fragments, 
concluded that they can become areas favorable to the natural regeneration of native species, due to 
this proximity. In view of this, through a low financial cost assessment of the soil seed bank, 
cataloging the floristic composition and the density of species, it is possible to define strategies for 
ecological succession in areas that need restoration (Martins 2001, Brancalion et al. 2015). 

Through this study we can see that at a distance of about 30 meters from the watercourse, 
there is no significant difference between species diversity. The only factor that separates the border 
and interior region is the number of individuals and ecological group. There is also an ecological 
balance between fauna and flora, since most of the cataloged species are dispersed by animals. 
Therefore, the conservation of natural fragments is important both for the maintenance of plant and 
animal species, and for obtaining propagules intended for the recovery of degraded areas. From the 
analysis of the seed bank in the study area, it is possible to recognize the potential of the fragment in 
question to supply propagules or even litter transposition for ecological restoration, given the 
recognized floristic diversity. 

The authors thank the Colonel of the Guarnição da Aeronáutica de Pirassununga Samuel de 
Mattos Barroso for the information; José Victor da Silva for the field assistance, the Programa de 
Pós-Graduação em Ciências Ambientais (PPGCAm) for the research assistance; and the Coordenação 
de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (CAPES) for promoting research. 
