Publication status: Preprint has been published in a journal as an article
DOI of the published article: https://doi.org/10.1590/0100-6991e-20202595
The role of Angiology and Vascular Surgery in the COVID-19
pandemic
Bernardo Cunha Senra  Barros, Aline Barbosa  Maia, Marcos Arêas  Marques, Paulo Roberto 
Prette-junior, Stenio Karlos Alvim  Fiorelli, Fernanda De Castro  Cerqueira
https://doi.org/Not informed
Submitted on: 2020-05-29
Posted on: 2020-05-29 (version 1)
(YYYY-MM-DD)
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
Rev Col Bras Cir 47:e20202595
DOI: 10.1590/0100-6991e-20202595
	
INTRODUCTION
C
OVID-19 is an infectious disease caused by a newly 
discovered coronavirus subtype (Sars-CoV-2) in the 
city of Wuhan, China, in December 2019. It has already 
infected more than two million people around the 
world until the date of preparation of this manuscript, 
according to data from the World Health Organization1.
It is a disease with a broad clinical spectrum, 
and may present asymptomatically or as a flu syndrome, 
with symptoms such as fever, cough and myalgia, in 
addition to evolving in some cases to severe pneumonia 
or severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)2.
Laboratory changes such as lymphopenia, 
neutrophilia, increased prothrombin time and elevated 
D-dimer (DD) are found in patients who have an 
unfavorable course of the disease3. In addition, the study 
by Zhou et al.4 with 191 patients from Jinyintan Hospitals 
and the Wuhan Pulmonary Hospital proposed that 
advanced age, higher SOFA score and DD greater than 
1 μg/mL at admission were associated with a higher risk 
of death; approximately 90% of hospitalized patients 
with pneumonia also displayed hypercoagulability4. The 
same study also stated that the possible contributory 
mechanisms for the systemic changes found in such 
patients include: (1) the formation of pro-inflammatory 
cytokines, which are mediators of atherosclerosis, 
contributing directly to the rupture of the atherosclerotic 
plaque by local inflammation, (2) induction of pro-
coagulant factors, and (3) hemodynamic changes that 
predispose to ischemia and thrombosis. 
Thus, hospitalized and critically ill patients 
have hematological changes that can be proven, for 
example, by high DD rates. However, the relationship 
Review article
The role of Angiology and Vascular Surgery in the COVID-19 
pandemic
A atuação da Angiologia e da Cirurgia Vascular na pandemia de COVID-19
A B S T R A C T
The New Coronavirus Epidemic (2019-nCoV), discovered in the city of Wuhan, China, in December 2019, presents mainly with pulmonary 
pneumonia that is preceded by fever, cough and myalgia. However, as the disease spread globally and the number of hospitalizations 
increased exponentially, it was noted that most serious patients hospitalized by COVID-19 have laboratory changes worthy of attention, 
such as lymphopenia, neutrophilia, increased time of prothrombin and increased levels of D-dimer. Due to these changes proving to be 
crucial for the mortality and morbidity rates in this subset of infected people, several studies focusing on the pathophysiology, mainly 
hematological, of the disease appear every day. Deepening these studies, several published works have shown SarsCoV-2 infection to the 
installation of a prothrombotic state in hospitalized patients, which leads to the potential occurrence of thrombotic or arterial events in this 
cohort. Thus, in order to understand how the departments of Angiology and Vascular Surgery are acting in the context of the COVID-19 
pandemic, this work aims to gather studies that reveal from protocols applied in vascular services in the current situation, until to the role of 
vascular surgeons and angiologists in the clinical and surgical management of patients infected or not, as a way of helping and clarifying this 
specialty during the context of a pandemic due to the new coranavirus. For the selection of works, the following search criteria were used: 
“Coronavirus and venous thrombosis”, “Coronavirus and thrombosis”, “COVID-19 and venous thrombosis” and “COVID-19 Coronavirus 
and thrombosis”.
Keywords: Coronavirus Infections. Blood Coagulation. Thrombosis. Pulmonary Embolism. Coronavirus.
Bernardo Cunha Senra Barros1,2,3     ; Aline Barbosa Maia2; Marcos Arêas Marques2,4; Paulo Roberto Prette-junior2; Stenio Karlos 
Alvim Fiorelli2; Fernanda De Castro Cerqueira, ACBC-RJ3.
1 - State University of Rio de Janeiro, Department of Vascular Surgery - Rio de Janeiro - RJ - Brazil 2 - Federal University of the State of Rio de Janeiro, 
Department of Vascular Surgery - Rio de Janeiro - RJ - Brazil 3 - University of the State of Rio de Janeiro, Laboratory of Physiology and Microcirculation 
(BIOVASC) - Rio de Janeiro - RJ - Brazil 4 - Rio de Janeiro State University, Pedro Ernesto University Hospital (HUPE), Angiology Service - Rio de Janeiro 
- RJ - Brazil
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/Not informed
2
Barros
The role of Angiology and Vascular Surgery in the COVID-19 pandemic
Rev Col Bras Cir 47:e20202595
between 
the 
Sars-Cov-2 
virus 
and 
coagulation 
mechanisms is still poorly explored in recent studies. 
Han et al.5 demonstrated that antithrombin, a natural 
anticoagulant, values in patients with COVID-19 were 
lower, while DD and other fibrin degradation product 
(FDP) were higher when compared with the control, 
healthy population. Blood coagulation in these patients 
thus appears to be altered, and FDP, including DD, can be 
predictive of disease progression. Therefore, the routine 
monitoring of such markers is advisable in patients with 
COVID-19, this result being similar to those found by 
Tang, Li, Wang and Sun6. As a result of the presumed 
prothrombotic status of many patients, there was a 
drastic increase in the demand for laboratory tests to 
monitor coagulation parameters, vascular ultrasound 
tests and other imaging methods in patients positive for 
COVID-19. This study aims to gather information about 
the routine work of vascular specialists and reference 
centers in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. We 
used the following search criteria: “Coronavirus and 
venous thrombosis”, “Coronavirus and thrombosis”, 
“COVID-19 and venous thrombosis” and “COVID-19 
Coronavirus and thrombosis”.
	
	
FINDINGS
1. Diagnosis and treatment of venous 
thromboembolism 
(VTE) 
during 
the 
COVID-19 pandemic
In line with recent studies that revealed the 
high risk of patients hospitalized with COVID-19 to 
develop thromboembolic events, the Departments of 
Angiology and Vascular Surgery of hospitals around the 
world were challenged due to the massive requirement 
for computed tomography (CT) scans and echo-color-
Doppler (ECD) for the diagnosis of pulmonary embolism 
(PE) and deep vein thrombosis (DVT), respectively, in 
these patients. Review the evidence for the diagnosis 
and treatment of VTE has become essential, as well 
as adapting clinical algorithms and flowcharts for use 
during the current world scenario. In addition, therapy 
recommendations for these patients is another critical 
point that must be approached with care, as the use 
of anticoagulants in patients who require invasive 
ventilation creates a potential bleeding risk. Therefore, 
the risk-benefit must always be reassessed during the 
clinical course.
To act in this scenario, the University of 
Michigan Health System, for example, published a 
complete study7 on the creation of a temporary committee 
of specialists in VTE, vascular surgeons and clinics, to 
review management protocols already established in 
the institution. This committee would consult with other 
specialists in areas such as pulmonology, hematology and 
medical clinic, among others, so that a new action plan 
could be developed and executed to better serve patients 
during the pandemic. For the decision on the use of 
VTE prophylaxis, patients underwent assessment by the 
Caprini score8 at the time of hospital admission. Although 
there are not enough data to determine the incidence of 
VTE in patients positive for COVID-19, there is already 
evidence showing a reduction in mortality in patients with 
highly elevated DD (> 3x the upper normal limit) receiving 
thromboprophylaxis with non-fractionated (NFH) or low 
molecular weight (LMWH) heparin7. In addition, VTE 
and primary pulmonary thrombus may be underlying 
etiologies potentially responsible for the mortality of 
critically ill patients due to COVID-19. In view of these 
findings and the fact that less critical patients have a low 
risk of bleeding if they use thromboprophylaxis, the study 
committee recommends routine thromboprophylaxis for 
all patients hospitalized due to COVID-19, regardless of 
risk stratification.
As for the suspected diagnosis of PE, Obi et 
al analyzed two variables: the modified Wells score and 
whether the patient was intubated or not7.
Table 1. Suggested approach when suspecting pulmonary embolism 
and Wells score  < 47.
Orotracheal intubation
No
Yes
Orotracheal 
intubation
Prophylaxis
Empiric anti-
coagulation low dose
High risk 
of bleeding
Prophylaxis 
Prophylaxis 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/Not informed
3
Barros
The role of Angiology and Vascular Surgery in the COVID-19 pandemic
Rev Col Bras Cir 47:e20202595
The study did not recommend the use of ECD 
to exclude the diagnosis of PE due to its low accuracy. 
Negative DD associated with a low modified Wells score 
were considered sufficient to rule out the diagnosis. 
However, in the context of Sars-Cov-2 infection, which 
leads to an increase in DD values, its usefulness becomes 
compromised, which does not mean that its values should 
be ignored.
In intubated patients without SARS, there 
is a lack of data on the risk-benefit ratio of empirical 
anticoagulation strategies. The use of anticoagulation 
in doses lower than the full dose but higher than the 
prophylactic dose in patients with SARS was considered 
based on a previous experience of the team during the 
2009 H1N1 pandemic, but this strategy has not been 
tested in the current situation7. 
For suspected DVT, the Michigan Medicine team 
recommends the use of the Wells score, even though they 
recognize its limitation in the hospital environment. Its 
performance during the pandemic pneumonia scenario 
has not yet been proven on a large scale.
The use of DD dosage should not be the main 
criterion for performing imaging tests, as it is expected to 
be high in COVID-19, that is, other clinical manifestations 
of DVT should be evaluated before requesting such tests 
for its final diagnosis.
Finally, the Michigan Medicine team touch on 
long-term anticoagulant therapy. In patients treated with 
anticoagulants and who are unable to undergo imaging 
tests for diagnostic purposes during the COVID-19 
outbreak, they recommend treatment with direct oral 
anticoagulants or vitamin K antagonists for one to 
two months after hospital discharge, until an image 
examination can be done. For patients considered to be at 
moderate to high risk for PE, a CT scan should be requested 
within one month once they are considered negative for 
COVID-19. For patients considered to be at high risk for 
DVT, a lower limb ECD should be requested again once 
they are considered negative for COVID-19. All patients 
should be followed and provided recommendations for 
long-term duration of therapy7. 
For Casini et al.9, all patients hospitalized with 
COVID-19 should receive pharmacoprophylaxis, unless 
contraindicated. Thus, they recommend the use of LMWH 
in patients with creatinine clearance > 30 mL/min and NFH 
in patients with clearance < 30mL/min, increasing the dose 
in both cases in patients over 100kg. They also guide the 
regular monitoring (daily or two to three times a week) 
of all patients with prothrombin time, DD, fibrinogen, 
platelet count, LDH, creatinine and ALT, in addition to 
antithrombin if the patient has DIC, coagulopathy induced 
by sepsis or heparin resistance, and anti-Xa activity in 
selected cases. One should consider the use of therapeutic 
doses of NFH or LMWH in ICU patients with increased DD, 
signs of severe inflammation, or signs of hepatic or renal 
dysfunction.
Table 2. Suggested approach when suspecting pulmonary embolism 
and Wells score > 47.
Low risk of 
bleeding
Anticoagulation
High risk of 
bleeding
CT*
Negative
Empiric 
anticoagulation – 
low dose
Positive
OTI†
Anticoagulation
No 
OTI
Anticoagulation
* CT: Computed tomography; †OTI: orotracheal intubation. 
Table 3. Suggested approach supported by the Wells score when suspecting deep venous thrombosis7.
Wells score < 2
Not intubated
Prophylaxis
Intubated and critical – low risk of bleeding
Low dose empiric anticoagulation
Wells score >2
VTE-BLEED* < 2
Not intubated
Anticoagulation
Intubated and critical
Low dose empiric anticoagulation
VTE-BLEED* > 2 +
Negative
Tromboprofilaxia
With CT or other 
image method
Positive
Anticoagulation or vena cava filter
* Risk score for major bleeding in patients with venous thromboembolism.
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/Not informed
4
Barros
The role of Angiology and Vascular Surgery in the COVID-19 pandemic
Rev Col Bras Cir 47:e20202595
In Italy, Marietta et al.10 published a study 
in which they guide some care regarding hemostasis 
when approaching the patient with COVID-19. 
• In the management of confirmed patients, 
laboratory monitoring should always include hemostatic 
function, platelet count and DVT testing, when possible.
• The 
use 
of 
prophylactic 
doses 
of 
fondaparinux, LMWH or NFH is strongly advised in all 
hospitalized patients, or mechanical prophylaxis (limb 
compression) if not possible.
• Pharmacoprophylaxis should be administered 
during the entire hospitalization and up to seven to 14 
days after discharge or in the pre-hospital phase if the case 
of persisting or pre-existing VTE risks factors.
• Intermediate doses of LMWH can be 
considered in patients with multiple risk factors for VTE.
• Therapeutic doses of LMWH or NFH are 
recommended only in patients diagnosed with VTE or 
Table 4. Transiction protocol from oral to parenteral  anticoagulation in patients COVID-197.
Medication
TEV
FA não valvar
Cardiologic valves 
Mechanics or 
Recent biologic
Antagonists of 
vitamine K
Suspend the AVK* when 
INR < 2,0
Suspend the 
AVK when INR < 2,0
Do not suspend AVK + 
daily control of INR
HBPM or HNF if ClCreat 
<15mL/min in therapeutic 
dose
HBPM or HNF if ClCreat 
<15mL/min in therapeutic 
dose
If not possible maintain 
the AVK, use HBPM 100 
UI/kg or HNF with keep 
anti-Xa control within 
the superior limit
Anticoagulants 
direct oral
Suspend 
the ACODs
Suspend 
the ACODs†
After 12-24h Start the HBPM 
or HNF if ClCreat <15mL/min 
in therapeutic dose
After 12-24h Start the 
HBPM or HNF if ClCreat 
<15mL/min in therapeutic 
dose
* Vitamine K antigonists; †Direct oral anticoagulants ‡,§,||,¶
as a bridging strategy in patients who already use oral 
anticoagulants, since the use of oral anticoagulants can 
represent significant interference in the antiretroviral 
treatment of patients with COVID-19.
• In patients using full doses, one should 
consider the dosage of anti-Xa factor or oral 
anticoagulants in plasma.
We should note that several studies have 
shown that the patient with COVID-19 has a state of 
hypercoagulability2,5,6,11,12 and that, therefore, the 
pulmonary microembolism index is probably higher than 
reported. Hence, it is also possible that PE is already 
present in many patients before admission, justifying 
the decreased response to thromboprophylaxis in the 
hospital environment.
Testa et al.13, from Cremona, Italy, shared the 
protocol used in their Hospital for the transition from oral 
to parenteral anticoagulant in patients with COVID-19.
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/Not informed
5
Barros
The role of Angiology and Vascular Surgery in the COVID-19 pandemic
Rev Col Bras Cir 47:e20202595
2. The role of Vascular Surgery
Due to the sudden increase in hospitalizations 
to meet the needs of COVID-19 critically ill patients, 
several hospital units found themselves in need of 
restructuring their services. 
The Vascular Surgery Unit of a tertiary hospital 
in Singapore14, for example, has reallocated 25% of 
its staff to act on the front line of pandemic care. This 
rearrangement was necessary both because of the 
increased demand for health professionals, regardless of 
the specialty, which the moment requires, and because 
of the need to care for patients who need some surgical 
intervention, but who also have symptoms of Sars-
CoV-2 infection. In addition, to keep the emergency 
and elective Vascular Surgery Services functioning, two 
to three surgeons stayed at the Tan Tock Seng Hospital, 
while the rest of the team was at the National Center for 
Infectious Diseases, attending to the cases of COVID-19. 
Among the measures adopted, we highlight:
• Suspension 
of 
non-essential 
meetings, 
maintaining the use of digital platforms.
• Essential meetings with a maximum of ten 
people, respecting the use of masks and a distance of 
one meter between participants. In addition, carrying 
out daily visits with a small number of people, the 
patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 being 
seen by only one person in charge of the team.
• Outpatient vascular surgery operation only 
for diabetic foot care, as well as reviewing the need for 
care every two to three weeks before the scheduled date 
of those who needed surgery or symptomatic patients. 
• Postponement of consultations for chronic 
patients, ensuring medications supply and offering 
home delivery service.
• Maintenance only of the elective surgeries 
that would have an immediate impact on patients’ 
quality of life and on mortality or would reduce the risk 
of amputation.
• Screening for symptoms suggestive of 
COVID-19 infection in patients undergoing surgery at 
the time of admission and referral of positive cases to 
the emergency room.
• In the operative act, other measures such as 
the permanence of the team outside the room during 
anesthetic induction and recovery.
• The use of personal protective equipment 
(PPE), consisting of N95 mask or air purifying respirator, 
goggles, sterile waterproof suits and double layer 
of sterile gloves by the surgical team, which must be 
composed of the as few people as possible. The study 
indicates that the air-purifying respirator is ideal for 
prolonged surgeries (more than 3 hours), as it is more 
comfortable for the surgeon. A relevant point is that 
vascular surgeons should be aware of the complexity of 
using magnifying surgical loupes associated with the use 
of PPE when operating suspected or positive COVID-19 
patients, especially when performing their removal and 
cleaning.
The Vascular and Endovascular Surgery 
Section of the Heart Institute of Minneapolis, following 
the recommendations of the American College of 
Surgeons15 for COVID in elective procedures, instituted 
drastic changes in its clinical practice. The unit chose to 
postpone all elective procedures but those considered 
essential, whose absence could in some way threaten 
patients’ life or limbs integrity. To ensure that postponed 
procedures are not forgotten, a database was developed 
so that rescheduling can be carried out later. Most 
outpatient visits were converted to telephone visits, 
limiting the review of medical records and imaging 
exam to protect the clinical staff16. 
In Italy, the Department of Vascular and 
Endovascular Surgery at the Hospital San Giovanni di 
Dio in Florence adopted a reorganization protocol, also 
creating a Surgical Vascular Sector for urgent cases of 
COVID-19. The main measures were:
• Suspension of all varicose vein surgeries and 
office and emergency activities.
• Centralization of aneurysm and symptomatic 
carotid artery procedures, as well as vascular surgery to 
correct critical limb ischemia (CLI) and arteriovenous 
fistula for hemodialysis.
• Prioritization of endovascular treatment 
over bypasses, in order to eliminate the need for an 
anesthesiologist in the operating room.
• Asymptomatic carotid lesions referred to 
a private hospital that was available to perform them 
during this period.
• Urgent cases of hemodynamically stable, 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/Not informed
6
Barros
The role of Angiology and Vascular Surgery in the COVID-19 pandemic
Rev Col Bras Cir 47:e20202595
confirmed or suspected, COVID-19 patients from 
peripheral hospitals centralized to a COVID-19-dedicated 
Surgical Sector created with a wing isolated from the 
other operational sectors, converted into an operating 
room and ICU beds, with an emergency transfer area 
with an exclusive elevator.
• Standardization 
of 
the 
professionals’ 
equipping sequence, in which surgeons access a room, 
where they dress with PPE, including N95 mask, goggles, 
face shield, sterile waterproof suits, foot protectors and 
two pairs of surgical gloves. Then, the surgeons go to 
the operating room of the COVID-19 area, where an 
alcoholic solution is applied to the second pair of gloves, 
a sterile gown and an extra pair of sterile surgical gloves 
are placed. After the surgery is completed, surgeons 
proceed to a room located in front of the operating 
room, as on a production line, to remove the PPE under 
the supervision of a trained operator. 
• Postoperative evaluation made by two 
doctors, with only one contacting the patient using the 
PPE, and the other waiting outside the room, considered 
“uncontaminated”, in order to reduce the risk of cross 
contamination in the health team.
• Some surgeons stayed in their homes for 
a few days alternately, in order to preserve a set of 
uninfected professionals who could be used at any time 
in case of need or to replace infected colleagues of any 
specialty.
In this established care algorithm, the clear 
separation between COVID and non-COVID hospitals, 
with at least one mandatory test for all admitted patients, 
was the first step in organizing and restructuring care 
during the outbreak17.
	
DISCUSSION
A better understanding of the mechanisms of 
pathological changes in critically ill patients hospitalized 
by COVID-19 has been increasingly the focus of studies 
that aim to define more assertive therapies and better 
clinical monitoring during the hospitalization of such 
patients. Several clinical studies have revealed that the 
“inflammatory cytokines storm”18-20 is an important 
mechanism implicated in the worsening and mortality 
of patients with COVID-19. One study revealed that IL-6 
levels in critically ill patients were significantly higher 
than in mild cases, evidencing the contribution of this 
cytokine to many pathophysiological effects in critically ill 
patients such as vascular leakage, complement activation 
and coagulation cascade and induction, in very rare 
cases, of disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). 
The same study showed that the use of LMWH improves 
the coagulation dysfunction of patients with COVID-19, 
as it has anti-inflammatory effects, that is, its use can 
contribute to prevent or even reverse the cytokine 
storm, thus improving the condition of the patients, and 
corroborating its potential therapeutic use21. A study 
conducted at the Weill Cornell Medicine in New York 
followed this intention to deepen the pathophysiological 
knowledge on the disease using pulmonary and skin 
biopsy and autopsy samples and from five individuals 
with severe COVID-19. They found that at least some 
patients infected with SARS-CoV-2 who became seriously 
ill suffered a generalized thrombotic microvascular lesion 
that appears to be mediated by intense complement 
activation. Although their five evaluated cases rendered 
generalization impossible, there is a suspicion that a subset 
of critically ill patients with COVID-19 may, together with 
their pro-coagulant state, have associated microvascular 
lesions that are relevant to the unfavorable outcome that 
most of these patients have22. Thus, the complement 
system can play a critical role in the pathogenicity of 
the disease and further studies in this area need to be 
developed. 
Despite advances in publications around the 
relationship between COVID-19 and the prothrombotic 
condition that patients have been presenting, so far there 
are no complete studies associating VTE with COVID-19 
infection. However, Cui et al.23 retrospectively analyzed 
81 critically ill patients with COVID-19 pneumonia in 
the ICU and found an incidence of 25% of VTE. Klok 
et al.24, found an incidence of 31% of thrombotic 
complications in ICU patients with COVID-19 infections 
despite thrombosis prophylaxis, this percentage being 
remarkably high. Middeldorp et al.25 stated that the 
risk of VTE in patients with COVID-19 is high, especially 
in patients hospitalized in the ICU, and that adopting 
a screening strategy with diagnostic tests at a low 
threshold may be a good approach. It is thus clear that 
a joint effort between local professionals working in the 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/Not informed
7
Barros
The role of Angiology and Vascular Surgery in the COVID-19 pandemic
Rev Col Bras Cir 47:e20202595
field of Angiology and Vascular Surgery is necessary so 
that a collaborative network can increasingly improve, at 
the collective level, the carried out procedures and care 
flowcharts, in addition to assisting in the remodeling of 
services provided during the COVID-19 pandemic.
	
CONCLUSION
COVID-19 can predispose to venous and arterial 
thromboembolic diseases due to excessive inflammation, 
hypoxia, immobilization and DIC. Therefore, there is a 
need for risk stratification for VTE for all hospitalized 
patients through the use of scores such as the Caprini8, 
in addition to the complementary use of scores to stratify 
the risk of bleeding. 
Note that thromboprophylaxis is necessary 
during the hospitalization of patients with COVID-19, 
unless there is a contraindication, the choice and 
duration of therapy varying according to the patient’s 
clinical situation and the protocol established in the 
hospital unit, and based on the guidelines of the 
Hemostasis and Thrombosis Societies. The post-discharge 
thromboprophylaxis of the patient with COVID-19 
remains lacking in data, with no consensus, and the 
decision for its use and DD cutoff point that guides 
its choice must be made individually, always analyzing 
the risk of thrombotic or bleeding events, according to 
established institutional protocols based on previous safe 
evidence. 
In addition to the clinical management of 
vascular and hematological complications that Sars-
CoV-2 infection can cause, vascular surgery departments 
need to readjust their routines by creating or reviewing 
algorithms and protocols that make their performance 
possible, even if restricted, during the current world 
outbreak of COVID-19.
	
REFERENCES
1.	
World Health Organization. WHO Coronavirus 
diseases (COVID-19) Dashboard [Internet]. 2020 
[acesso em 28 abr 2020]. Disponível em: https://
covid19.who.int/.
2.	
Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, Ren L, Zhao J, Hu Y, et 
al. Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 
novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. Lancet. 2020; 
395(10223):497-506.
3.	
Lippi G, Plebani M. Laboratory abnormalities in 
patients with COVID-2019 infection. Clin Chem Lab 
Med. 2020 Mar 3. doi: 10.1515/cclm-2020-0198.
4.	
Zhou F, Yu T, Du R, Fan G, Liu Y, Liu Z, et al. Clinical 
course and risk factors for mortality of adult inpatients 
with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China: a retrospective 
cohort study. Lancet. 2020;395(10229):1054-62.
5.	
Han H, Yang L, Liu R, Liu F, Wu K, Li J, et al. 
A epidemia pelo novo Coronavirus (2019-nCoV), surgido na cidade de Wuhan, na China, em dezembro de 2019, quando sintomática, 
apresenta-se majoritariamente por um quadro de pneumonia pulmonar que é precedida por febre, tosse seca e mialgia. No entanto, 
conforme a doença se espalhou globalmente e o número de hospitalizações aumentaram de forma exponencial, notou-se que a 
maior parte dos pacientes graves internados por COVID-19 possuem alterações laboratoriais dignas de atenção, como linfopenia, 
neutrofilia, aumento do tempo de protrombina e elevação dos níveis de D-dímero. Devido tais mudanças se mostrarem cruciais para 
a taxa de mortalidade e morbidade nesse subgrupo de infectados, diversos trabalhos com enfoque na fisiopatologia, principalmente 
hematológica, da doença surgem a cada dia. Aprofundando em tais estudos, variados trabalhos publicados evidenciaram a infecção pelo 
Sars-CoV-2 à instalação de um estado pró-trombótico em pacientes hospitalizados graves, o que acarreta em potencial ocorrência de 
eventos trombóticos venosos ou arteriais nessa coorte. Assim, para entender como os Departamentos de Angiologia e Cirurgia Vascular 
estão atuando no contexto da pandemia de COVID-19, este estudo tem por objetivo reunir estudos que revelam desde protocolos 
aplicados nos serviços vasculares na atual conjuntura, até a atuação dos cirurgiões vasculares e angiologistas no manejo clínico e 
cirúrgico de pacientes infectados ou não, como forma de ajudar e esclarecer essa especialidade durante o contexto de pandemia pelo 
novo coronavírus. Para a seleção dos trabalhos foram utilizados os seguintes critérios de busca: “Coronavirus and venous thrombosis”, 
“Coronavirus and thrombosis”, “COVID-19 and venous thrombosis” e “COVID-19 Coronavirus and thrombosis”.
Palavras chave: Infecções por Coronavirus. Coagulação Sanguínea. Trombose. Embolia Pulmonar. Coronavirus.
R E S U M O
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/Not informed
8
Barros
The role of Angiology and Vascular Surgery in the COVID-19 pandemic
Rev Col Bras Cir 47:e20202595
Prominent changes in blood coagulation of patients 
with SARS-CoV-2 infection. Clin Chem Lab Med. 
2020 Mar 16. doi: 10.1515/cclm-2020-0188.
6.	
Tang N, Li D, Wang X, Sun Z. Abnormal coagulation 
parameters are associated with poor prognosis in 
patients with novel coronavirus pneumonia. J 
Thromb Haemost. 2020;18(4):844-7.
7.	
Obi AT, Barnes GD, Wakefield TW, Brown Rvt S, 
Eliason JL, Arndt E, et al. Practical diagnosis and 
treatment of suspected venous thromboembolism 
during COVID-19 Pandemic. J Vasc Surg Venous 
Lymphat Disord. 2020 Apr 16. doi: 10.1016/j.
jvsv.2020.04.009.
8.	
Pannucci CJ, Swistun L, MacDonald JK, Henke PK, 
Brooke BS. Individualized venous thromboembolism 
risk stratification using the 2005 Caprini score to 
identify the benefits and harms of chemoprophylaxis 
in surgical patients: a meta-analysis. Ann Surg. 
2017;265(6):1094-103.
9.	
Casini A, Alberio L, Angelillo-Scherrer  A, Fontana 
P, Gerber B, Graf L, et al. Thromboprophylaxis 
and laboratory monitoring for in-hospital patients 
with COVID-19 – A Swiss Consensus Statement 
by the Working Party Hemostasis. Swiss Med 
Wkly. 2020 Apr 11;150:w20247. doi:10.4414/
smw.2020.20247. 
10.	 Marietta M, Ageno W, Artoni A, De Candia E, 
Gresele P, Marchetti M, et al. COVID-19 and 
haemostasis: a position paper from Italian Society 
on Thrombosis and Haemostasis (SISET). Blood 
Transfus. 2020 Apr 8. doi: 10.2450/2020.0083-20.
11.	 Wu Z, McGoogan JM. Characteristics of and 
important lessons from the coronavirus disease 
2019 (COVID-19) outbreak in China: summary 
of a report of 72,314 cases from the Chinese 
Center for Disease Control and Prevention. 
JAMA. 2020;323(13):1239-1242. doi: 10.1001/
jama.2020.2648.
12.	 Thachil J, Tang N, Gando S, Falanga A, Cattaneo M, 
Levi M, et al. ISTH interim guidance on recognition 
and management of coagulopathy in COVID-19. J 
Thromb Hemost. 2020;18(5):1023-6.
13.	 Testa S, Paoletti O, Giorgi-Pierffranceschi M, Pan 
A. Switch from oral anticoagulants to parenteral 
heparin in SARS-CoV-2 hospitalized patients. Intern 
Emerg Med. 2020 Apr 15. doi: 10.1007/s11739-
020-02331-1.
14.	 Tan GWL, Chandrasekar S, Lo ZJ, Hong Q, Yong E, 
Lingam P, et al. Early Experience in the COVID-19 
pandemic from a Vascular Surgery Unit in a 
Singapore Tertiary Hospital. J Vasc Surg. 2020 Apr 
17. doi: 10.1016/j.jvs.2020.04.014.
15.	 American 
College 
of 
Surgeons 
[Internet]. 
Chicago 
(IL): 
ACS; 
c1996-2020. 
COVID-19: 
Recommendations for Management of Elective 
17 Surgical Procedures [about 2 p.]. Available 
from: 
https://www.facs.org/about-acs/covid19/
information-for-surgeons/elective-surgery 
16.	 Mirza AK. Perspectives on vascular surgical practice 
change due to COVID-19 at a nonacademic tertiary 
care center. J Vasc Surg. 2020 Apr 17: S0741-
5214(20)30592-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jvs.2020.04.016.
17.	 Chisci E, Masciello F, Michelagnoli S. Creation of a 
vascular surgical Hub responding to the COVID-19 
emergency: the Italian USL Toscana Centro model. 
J Vasc Surg. 2020 Apr 16:S0741-5214(20)30605-4. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jvs.2020.04.019.
18.	 Wang C, Horby PW, Hayden FG, Gao GF. A novel 
coronavirus outbreak of global health concern. 
Lancet. 2020;395(10223):470-3.
19.	 Zhou W, Liu YS, Tian D,  Wang C, Cheng J, Hu M, 
et al. Potential benefits of precise corticosteroids 
therapy for severe 2019-nCoV pneumonia. Signal 
Transduct Target Ther. 2020;5(1):18. doi: 10.1038/
s41392-020-0127-9
20.	 Wan S, Yi Q, Fan S, Lv J, Zhang X, Guo L, et al. 
Characteristics of lymphocyte subsets and cytokines 
in peripheral blood of 123 hospitalized patients with 
2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia (NCP). MedRxiv. 
2020 Feb 12. doi: 10.1101/2020.02.10.20021832.
21.	 Shi C, Wang C, Wang H, Yang C, Cai F, Zeng F, et 
al. The potential of low molecular weight heparin to 
mitigate cytokine storm in severe COVID-19 patients: 
a retrospective clinical study. Medrxiv. 2020 Apr 15. 
doi: 10.1101/2020.03.28.20046144v3.
22.	 Magro C, Mulvey JJ, Berlin D, Nuovo G, Salvatore S, 
Harp J, et al. Complement associated microvascular 
injury and thrombosis in the pathogenesis of severe 
COVID-19 infection: a report of five cases. Transl 
Res. 2020 Apr 15; S1931-5244(20)30070-0. doi: 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/Not informed
9
Barros
The role of Angiology and Vascular Surgery in the COVID-19 pandemic
Rev Col Bras Cir 47:e20202595
10.1016/j.trsl.2020.04.007.
23.	 Cui S, Chen S, Li X, Liu S, Wang F. Prevalence of 
venous thromboembolism in patients with severe 
novel coronavirus pneumonia. J Thromb Haemost . 
2020 Apr 9. doi: 10.1111/jth.14830.
24.	 Klok FA, Kruip MJHA, van der Meer NJM, Arbous 
MS, Gommers DAMPJ, Kant KM, et al. Incidence 
of thrombotic complications in critically ill ICU 
patients with COVID-19. Thromb Res. 2020 Apr 
10;S0049-3848(20)30120-1. 
doi: 
10.1016/j.
thromres.2020.04.013
25.	 Middeldorp S, Coppens M, van Haaps TF, Foppen 
M, Vlaar AP, Müller MC, et al. Incidence of venous 
thromboembolism in hospitalized patients with 
COVID-19. J Thromb Haemost. 2020 May 5. doi: 
10.1111/jth.14888. Online ahead of print.
Received in: 15/04/2020
Accepted for publication: 28/04/2020
Conflict of interest: no.
Funding source: none.
Mailing address:
Bernardo Cunha Senra Barros
E-mail: drbernardobarros@gmail.com
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/Not informed
This preprint was submitted under the following conditions: 
The authors declare that they are aware that they are solely responsible for the content of the preprint and
that the deposit in SciELO Preprints does not mean any commitment on the part of SciELO, except its
preservation and dissemination.
The authors declare that the necessary Terms of Free and Informed Consent of participants or patients in
the research were obtained and are described in the manuscript, when applicable.
The authors declare that the preparation of the manuscript followed the ethical norms of scientific
communication.
The authors declare that the data, applications, and other content underlying the manuscript are
referenced.
The deposited manuscript is in PDF format.
The authors declare that the research that originated the manuscript followed good ethical practices and
that the necessary approvals from research ethics committees, when applicable, are described in the
manuscript.
The authors declare that once a manuscript is posted on the SciELO Preprints server, it can only be taken
down on request to the SciELO Preprints server Editorial Secretariat, who will post a retraction notice in its
place.
The authors agree that the approved manuscript will be made available under a Creative Commons CC-BY
license.
The submitting author declares that the contributions of all authors and conflict of interest statement are
included explicitly and in specific sections of the manuscript.
The authors declare that the manuscript was not deposited and/or previously made available on another
preprint server or published by a journal.
If the manuscript is being reviewed or being prepared for publishing but not yet published by a journal, the
authors declare that they have received authorization from the journal to make this deposit.
The submitting author declares that all authors of the manuscript agree with the submission to SciELO
Preprints.
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
