Publication status: Preprint has been published in a journal as an article
DOI of the published article: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202339457247
Information and communication technologies in contextual
target situation analysis:  improving Online CEAP course design
in developing countries
Bruna Gabriela Augusto Marçal Vieira
https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202257247
Submitted on: 2022-09-26
Posted on: 2022-09-26 (version 1)
(YYYY-MM-DD)
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202257247   
 
Information and communication technologies in contextual target situation analysis:  
improving Online CEAP course design in developing countries 
Tecnologias de Informação e Comunicação na análise contextual da situação-alvo: 
aprimorando o desenho de cursos de CEAP online em países em desenvolvimento 
 
Bruna Gabriela Augusto Marçal Vieira1 
 
Abstract       
 
This paper discusses the benefits of information and communication technologies (ICT) in the 
contextual target situation analysis at a distance to design online critical English for academic 
purposes (CEAP) courses. A contextual investigation of the publishing process of high-impact 
journals in computer science is presented, which is aimed at identifying issues that might 
influence the publication of Brazilian researchers’ papers. The beliefs and experiences of 
Brazilian authors in the aforementioned process were analyzed through electronic 
questionnaires and remote interviews. Moreover, research articles’ reviews were studied to 
identify the community´s criteria for accepting or rejecting papers. Via ICT, a wider 
contextual analysis was possible with participants located in different parts of the world. 
Results provided relevant information about researching and publishing in the field, which 
may substantiate the design of tasks aimed at improving students’ critical academic literacy. 
For developing continental countries such as Brazil, saving time and resources through ICT in 
CEAP courses’ design means the possibility of investing in a more relevant instruction, which 
better attends to students’ contextual needs and wants.   
Keywords: contextual genre analysis, target situation, needs analysis, online CEAP, ICT 
 
Resumo       
Este trabalho discute os benefícios de Tecnologias de Informação e Comunicação (TIC) na  
 
1 Universidade Estadual Paulista – UNESP. São José do Rio Preto / Centro Federal de 
Educação Tecnológica de Minas Gerais – CEFET-MG. Araxá – Brazil. 
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3651-1198. E-mail: brunagabriela@cefetmg.br    
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202257247
análise contextual a distância da situação-alvo durante a elaboração de um curso online de 
inglês para fins acadêmicos em sua perspectiva crítica. Essa análise, com foco no processo de 
publicação acadêmica em periódicos de alto impacto na área de ciência da computação, 
buscou identificar fatores que possam influenciar o aceite de artigos produzidos por 
pesquisadores brasileiros. Crenças e a experiência de autores brasileiros foram analisadas no 
referido processo via questionários eletrônicos e entrevistas remotas. Ademais, pareceres de 
artigos de pesquisa foram estudados, e os critérios avaliativos dessa comunidade, 
identificados. Por meio das TICs, uma ampla análise contextual foi possível, contemplando 
pesquisadores localizados em diversas partes do globo. Os resultados revelam práticas de 
pesquisa e publicação na área que podem fundamentar o desenho de tarefas voltadas à 
promoção do letramento acadêmico dos alunos. Em países em desenvolvimento, como o 
Brasil, economizar tempo e recursos, por meio das TICs, durante o desenho de cursos 
significa a possibilidade de investimento em um ensino relevante, que melhor atenda às 
necessidades discentes. 
Palavras-chave: análise contextual de gênero, situação-alvo, análise de necessidades, inglês 
para fins acadêmico crítico, TIC 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Education, as a dialogical social practice, is a dynamic and complex system that emerges out 
of the interaction of multiple factors (Mason, 2008). Society, individuals, institutions, 
disciplinary content, pedagogical and psychological theories are, at the same time, constituted 
within the interaction of social, historical, cultural, ideological, and financial factors, as well 
as elements that shape and are shaped by education. From this perspective, educational 
features are singular to contextual needs and constraints. Moreover, they are contextually 
organized in a never-ending movement of change. 
 
The advent of new technologies, or ICT (information and communication technologies), in 
the turn of the century, has drastically changed innumerous social systems (Warschauer, 
2002), including that of education. The inclusion of ICT in the teaching and learning 
processes has affected educational systems around the globe differently, causing, in the first 
moments, chaos and instability. Hara and Kling (2000), for instance, approached the 
influences of ICT on students, showing that lack of prompt feedback and technical problems 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202257247
were two reasons for students’ frustration in a web-based, distance language course in the 
United States. As far as the teachers/instructors are concerned, Lam (2000) showed that the 10 
language teachers interviewed in Canada about their use of ICT in their classes believed that 
the perceived limitations were related to the rush of institutions to obtain technological 
innovations without preparing teachers adequately. Regarding the institutions’ perspective, 
Karagiorgi (2005) reported the challenges to implement ICT in several elementary schools in 
Cyprus. 
 
Almost twenty years have passed since the inclusion of ICT in education. All these years of 
experience exchange among teachers, researchers, and institutions – provided by ICT – have 
led to educational (re)organization and improvement. Recent works in the literature illustrate 
the new possibilities brought by the digital era. Regarding research and practice of language 
teaching and learning, ICT has contributed to modernizing traditional teaching approaches 
and practices (cf. Eckhaus, 2018) and to developing new teaching tools and materials (cf. 
Sahraini & Syamsudarni, 2018). English for specific purposes (ESP) has also benefited from 
ICT in mainly two ways (Bloch, 2012): (i) changing traditional types of language learning 
with new tools, and (ii) creating new forms of communicating, enabling students to engage 
with their discourse community during classes. Less attention has been given to the use of 
ICT in needs analysis though, especially regarding the target situation. When analyzing the 
future communicative needs of students, technology has mainly been used in the investigation 
of linguistic (cf. Ha & Hyland, 2017) and textual features (cf. Supatranont, 2012) of 
specialized discourse. This paper presents the benefits of using ICT to investigate contextual 
features of language use in the target situation.  
 
A three-phase investigation was carried out through multiple technological tools for gathering 
information about contextual issues involved in the production and publication of research 
articles by Brazilian computer science experts to design an online critical English for 
academic purpose (CEAP) course for graduates. This paper aims to demonstrate how ICT 
may contribute to contextual target situation analysis at a distance, expanding the scope of 
investigation as well as saving time and resources in courses’ preparation. 
 
 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202257247
2. Literature review 
 
In this section, the complexity of language teaching and learning in CEAP courses is explored 
to justify the need for a contextual target situation analysis during needs analysis, which is not 
common in EAP/ESP literature. Afterwards, the use of ICT for such an investigation is 
presented, as a way to carry it out during the design of online CEAP courses.  
 
CEAP and the complexity of language teaching and learning 
 
Language teaching and learning, as with any other social practice, is a complex system, 
whose results depend on the interaction of an array of elements (Larsen-Freeman, 1997). 
Subjects, target language, language of instruction, students’ native language, materials, tasks, 
assessing tools, language and teaching theories, target discourse community, institutional and 
economic constraints, and so on, are all elements involved in language teaching and learning. 
Besides, each of them is also a complex system that emerges out of the interaction of other 
elements. Languages, for example, are the social, cultural, and ideological result of the 
interaction of people and artifacts to communicate/act in society.      
 
English for Specific Purposes (ESP) has acknowledged the complexity of language use, 
teaching, and learning. Therefore, one of the main principles of this approach is specificity. It 
refers to the linguistic, textual, and contextual configuration of discourse in a given social 
practice (target situation), which needs to be recognized to prepare students to engage in that 
practice through genre use (Hyland, 2002). It also refers to the needs of a given group of 
students (present situation) to develop their knowledge of those genres to the level that is 
recognized by a given discourse community. 
 
Needs analysis is the process through which ESP practitioners investigate specificity in the 
target and present situation (Songhori, 2008). This process materializes praxis, the second 
main principle of the approach. Kumaravadivelu (2001) calls it practicality and explains that 
when analyzing the specificities of the discourse to be taught and the specificities of the 
classroom, teachers assume the role of scientists, whose theories become the basis of their 
own teaching. Since the preliminary work of Swales (1990) in ESP, both principles have 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202257247
oriented ESP practice in occupational (EOP – English for occupational purposes) and 
academic (EAP – English for academic purposes) settings. 
 
EAP has been successfully implemented to the teaching of academic discourse, to both native 
and non-native students. Once it focuses on the specialized language that students need to 
produce in the academic environment, it usually becomes a requirement for scholars so they 
can be prepared for academic communication. The problem is that in many countries, such as 
the U.S., EAP has been seen as a service subservient discipline, whose sole aim is to prepare 
students to communication across the curriculum or in academia (Benesch, 2001). In order to 
fight against this underrepresentation, the critical perspective of EAP (CEAP) aims at putting 
into the forefront the complexity of language teaching and learning in the university, 
evidencing the potentialities of EAP pedagogy to promote students’ social awareness rather 
than just developing their linguistic skills. 
 
CEAP advocates, then, for a third main principle: criticism, which stands for a bigger focus 
on contextual issues during language classes. That means approaching injustices and 
inequalities in the target and in the present situation (Benesch, 1996). By analyzing and 
reflecting upon contextual elements which, at the same time, shape and are shaped by the 
target language, Benesch (2009) explains that CEAP may help students to reconceptualize 
their sense of citizenship, their own identities, and their critical thinking regarding their roles 
in the target discourse community. They might be able, then, not only to recognize and 
reproduce their peers’ discourse, but also to identify what needs to be changed, when and 
how, promoting social improvements in the community.  
 
A critical approach to EAP implies new roles for teachers and students, who are not only seen 
as technician and novice members of the discourse community, but, respectively, as 
transformative practitioners (Morgan, 2009) and legitimate members of the community who 
can also be agents of change (Benesch, 1996). In this respect, CEAP turns out to be a good 
investment in developing countries, where university students need to be prepared for 
academic communication and for the pursuit of scientific equity. 
 
ICT, as one of the main contemporary tools for human interaction, should also be an object of 
discussion in CEAP classes, once they start changing social systems, enabling them to 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202257247
become more globalized, and, nonetheless, increase social and economic discrepancies.1 In 
education, after a long period of adaptation, however, the use of ICT starts to bring good 
results. Thus, besides being an object of discussion, their use for language course design, 
implementation, and analysis tends to increase shortly. 
 
In CEAP pedagogy, technological devices may be used to assess students’ performance in 
CEAP tasks, their development throughout classes, and the validity of the courses (cf. Chun, 
2009). The advent of new modes of instruction (computer-assisted language learning - CALL 
and distance or blended learning) is one of the major benefits ICT brought to CEAP courses’ 
implementation (cf. Arnó-Macià & Rueda-Ramos, 2011). Finally, insofar as CEAP course 
design is concerned, ICT may be used for the elaboration of tasks, syllabus structuration, and 
needs analysis, for analyzing the present (cf. Vieira & Aranha, 2015a, 2015b; Vieira, 2017; 
Aranha & Vieira, 2018, Vieira, 2020) or target situation (Vieira, 2019b). The next section 
focuses on the use of ICT in the target situation analysis. 
 
Target situation analysis: a breeding ground for the use of ICT in CEAP 
 
Target situation analysis (TSA) is one of the main investigations to be conducted during needs 
analysis for CEAP course design. It comprehends what the learner needs to know to function 
effectively in the target situation (Songhori, 2008). TSA, then, is one of the procedures taken 
by the teacher in ESP/CEAP pedagogy to assure specificity, so they understand how language 
is used in the target discourse community and then can translate students’ needs into 
linguistic, literacy, and pedagogical tasks.  
 
Hyland (2007) explains that early studies focused on lexical and syntactic features of 
particular registers. Later, interest moved to the rhetorical macro-structure of specialist texts. 
Now a deeper interest in specific discourse communities leads to a pursuit of the 
understanding of community-situated language use and describing specific target texts 
required by learners. This investigation typically involves either experienced members of the 
community, the genres produced and consumed by them, or both.   
 
 
1 For a deeper understanding of the complex influences of ICT on social systems, cf. Warschauer’s (2003) 
discussion on the technological divide.  
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202257247
Regarding experienced members, questionnaires, interviews, and field observation are 
common instruments for data gathering, aiming at identifying the genres that students might 
use in the target situation, as well as the skills they must develop in their English abilities (cf. 
Sarmento, 2012). Genre analysis, on the other hand, tends to rely on texts produced and 
consumed by the community. It can be done either in a textual perspective — through which 
linguistic and rhetoric patterns of the target genre(s) are identified (cf. Cheng, 2008) — or in 
an intertextual one, aiming at identifying the genre system through which the members carry 
out their activity (cf. Molle & Prior, 2008).  
 
For the CEAP course design, nevertheless, there is a need for widening the scope of TSA. 
Since CEAP also focuses on contextual issues of the present and target situations, TSA must 
provide ways of eliciting information on social, political, and ideological features of the 
discourse community, which promotes and sustains power relations among members. In this 
context, Benesch (1996) advocates for a critical perspective on a needs analysis that 
acknowledges the hierarchical configuration of institutions. Concerning the TSA, a critical 
perspective also identifies the socio-cognitive demands related to the use of English by the 
target community, but goes further and treats them as a site of possible reform. ICT, then, has 
much to contribute to contextual target situation analysis.  
 
The use of ICT in contextual TSA has been most frequently used for data analysis, once most 
CEAP courses in the literature are locally implemented, allowing the teacher the opportunity 
to investigate the target discourse community in locus. Dehnad et al. (2010), for example, 
made use of computer software (SPSS) to analyze data collected from a questionnaire given 
to graduate students from a medical and management university, along with interviews 
conducted with the heads of departments, the students, and a high-ranking administrator of 
the university, to revise the syllabus of a CEAP course.  
 
For distance education in extensive territories, such as Brazil, however, locus procedures may 
be time- and resources-consuming, which can be solved using ICT for data gathering as 
proposed in this paper. The next two sections present a contextual TSA for the design of an 
online CEAP course for Brazilian computer science graduate students. Special attention will 
be given to the use of ICT for data gathering and how it has facilitated the investigation of 
critical issues at a distance. 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202257247
3. The Study 
 
Although the language of instruction in Brazilian universities is Portuguese, because of 
globalization, students have been required to read and write in English - the academic lingua 
franca (Ferreira & Lousada, 2016). Applicants to computer science graduate programs from 
most public universities in the country, for example, need to pass an English proficiency exam 
which tests their reading comprehension of academic texts. Moreover, once admitted to the 
program, graduates must publish at least one paper in high-impact journals to get their post-
graduation degree (Vieira, 2015a). Despite that, few institutions offer English writing courses 
for the development of students’ academic literacy (Aranha, 2009). To provide an accessible 
way for these learners to get prepared for academic writing communication, online CEAP 
courses have been proposed. 
 
In 2014, Vieira conducted a detailed needs analysis to investigate the purposes for which 
Brazilian computer science graduates need English in the academic environment. Results 
indicated that students’ immediate need is to write research articles and abstracts. Departing 
from this result, a TSA focused on both genres was recently conducted. Besides a textual 
analysis (to be presented in future work), a contextual analysis was done to investigate critical 
issues that regulate the use of both genres by the community. More specifically, the 
contextual TSA presented here aimed at identifying issues that might influence the acceptance 
of Brazilian computer scientists’ papers in high-impact journals. 
 
Once both genres circulate in a variety of contexts (production, legitimation, publication, 
distribution, and preservation) (cf. Khosrowjerdi, 2011), the contextual TSA focused on the 
contexts in which the students have active participation, starting from production and ending 
in the publication process of research articles. Still, an array of subjects, institutions and 
factors are involved in those processes, such as authors, referees, funding agencies, and so on. 
Thus, the contextual investigation mainly focused on understanding research article 
production and publication in high-impact journals through the lens of those whom the target 
students wish to become in a near future: the authors.  
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202257247
Brazilian experts who have published articles in the higher ranked journals in each of seven 
subfields in computer science, according to the Journal Citation Reports2 (JCR), over a five-
year period were invited to take part in this investigation. Differently from CEAP courses that 
take place in English-speaking countries or in countries where instruction is in English, the 
target situation here does not emerge from the interactions of a local community, but rather 
from a global one engaged in the process of academic publication in computer science. 
Investigating the contextual features of this target situation in person would be extremely 
time- and resource-consuming. Thus, as a viable alternative, ICT was used for both data 
gathering and analysis at a distance. Table 1 presents the ICT tools used in each of the three 
phases of the contextual TSA. 
 
Table 1 — Phases of contextual TSA 
 
Phase 
Instruments for 
data gathering 
ICT tools 
Phase 1 
Questionnaire 
Google web search, Google Docs, Web pages, 
Microsoft Word, Microsoft Excel. 
Phase 2 
Interviews 
E-mail, Skype, aTube Catcher, audio recorder, 
Microsoft Word, ELAN, AntConc. 
Phase 3 
Document analysis 
E-mail, Adobe Acrobat Reader DC, Microsoft Word, 
AntConc. 
 
Phase 1 aimed at raising the profile of those scientists. Phase 2 was divided into two parts, 
each having a different objective: investigating the ability of the participants to produce 
publishable research articles in high-impact journals (Part 1); and deepening the discussion 
about some contextual factors investigated in the questionnaire (Part 2). Finally, ending the 
investigation, Phase 3 focused on the analysis of reviews received by the authors about 
submitted papers to computer science journals.3  
 
2 It is an online platform, created by the database Web of Science, for scientific journal evaluation in every field of 
expertise. Based on the number of citations received by a journal in a given period, the journals are ranked. The 
more citations a journal gets, the better its position in the rank, demonstrating its impact factor in a certain field. 
3 Because there were humans involved in this investigation, a research project was submitted to the Ethical Board 
of the Institute of Biosciences, Humanities and Exact Sciences (Ibilce) of São Paulo State University (Unesp) 
(certificate number: 64609417.9.0000.5466). The project was approved by the Committee (review number 
1.994.945), as well as its final report (review number 2.970.646). Besides, all participants signed an Informed 
Consent.   
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202257247
4. ICT in CEAP’s critical needs analysis: a means to specificity, praxis and criticism 
 
Out of the 6.086 research articles published from 2011 to 2016 in the seven journals 
investigated, 67 were written by or in collaboration with 127 Brazilian researchers. Table 2 
presents the number of papers published by each journal in the considered period and the 
number of Brazilian researchers who produced them. When there was no contact information 
of the authors available in the published article, the Google web search engine was used to 
look up their profiles in a Brazilian database for researchers and institutions (Lattes)4. An e-
mail was then sent to each author, inviting him/her to participate in the research through 
answering an online questionnaire on Google Docs. The link to the questionnaire was added 
to the e-mail.5 
 
Table 2 — Number of Brazilian experts who have published research articles in the 
investigated journals  
 
Subfield 
Journal 
JCR Quantity 
Information Systems 
IEEE Communications Survey and Tutorials     
1 
30 
Artificial Intelligence 
IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems 
2 
30 
Theory and Methods 
IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary 
Computation 
5 
15 
Interdisciplinary 
Applications 
Computer Aided-Civil and Infrastructure 
Engineering 
7 
0 
Cybernetics 
IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics 
10 
17 
Hardware and 
Architecture 
IEEE Transactions on Neural Network and 
Learning Systems  
11 
22 
Software Engineering 
ACM Transactions on Graphics 
17 
15 
Total 
 
 
1296 
 
 
 
4 http://lattes.cnpq.br/ 
5 The questionnaire used in Phase 1 of contextual TSA is available at 
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdObnSvwlnFO1OzBE4ygIUVMp-tEev-JI-
3Qx1FCn0mjGFizQ/viewform  
6 Although the total number of researchers here is 129, there were 127 Brazilian (co)authors, because two of them 
took part in more than one publication. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202257247
Phase 1 – Questionnaire 
 
 
Eleven questions investigated social, academic, and scientific information about the authors, 
as well as their opinion on the influence of some contextual factors in the publishing process 
of high-impact journals. Thirty-eight authors participated in this phase, representing 29.92% 
of the invited experts – more than the minimum (10–20%) amount that represents a reliable 
sample of data, according to Oliveira and Grácio (2005).    
 
Data analysis was based on Aaker and Day (1990), in whose methodology nominal and 
ordinal analyses of tabulated data are conducted. In the former, personal, academic, and 
professional features of the subjects were identified, and in the latter, features that recurred 
among participants were analyzed. Because the questionnaire was online, data were 
automatically tabulated, and Microsoft Word and Excel were used for data description and 
analysis, as well as for the design of tables and charts.  
 
Questionnaires are a typical instrument used for data gathering during needs analysis by ESP 
practitioners (Flowerdew & Peacock, 2001). Using ICT, however, the benefits of 
questionnaires increase. First, online questionnaires might be more dynamic employing 
multiple stimuli that digital tools make possible, such as charts, figures, and animations. 
Moreover, sending questionnaires by e-mail is useful because they can be easily re-sent as 
many times as necessary, the time of response may be decreased, and participants have the 
convenience of answering them wherever and whenever they can. Besides all those benefits, 
in the present research, the use of online questionnaires made it possible to reach members 
from distant locations. Figure 1 presents those data.  
 
Among the participants, there were Brazilian computer scientists from four regions of the 
country and researchers who were then abroad. Considering that Brazilian computer science 
graduate students need English to share their research results with their peers around the 
globe, and because the target audience of the considered online CEAP course was students 
from around Brazil, the conduction of this global investigation of the target discourse 
community responded to this contextual specificity. Those different backgrounds have led to 
distinct experiences with academic publication among the researchers, which were deeply 
investigated in Phase 2, and will be discussed below. 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202257247
Figure 1 — Country/region of the participants of Phase 1 
  
 
   
Phase 2 – Interviews 
 
A sample of 29% of the questionnaire respondents agreed to participate in the next phase of 
the research. By e-mail, eleven participants were invited for the interviews, which were 
conducted individually through Skype video calls. aTube Catcher was used to record the 
interactions, and so was an audio recorder device as an alternate tool.  
 
After the interviews were finished, they were transcribed using ELAN, software for audio and 
video transcription. Data analysis was based on a six-step methodology for content analysis, 
proposed by Huckin (2004), in which, after defining the unities of analysis, data must be 
tabulated for interpretation. There were over eight hours of transcribed data; therefore, 
AntCon – software for text analysis – was used to optimize the work. 
 
Each interview, as mentioned above, was divided into two parts. Part 1 followed a Gordon 
and Dawes (2005) array protocol, in which the beliefs, strategies, and external behavior of 
participants were investigated to understand the structure of their experience in writing and 
22
4
6
1
2
1
2
Southeast-Brazil
South-Brazil
Northeast-Brazil
North-Brazil
Canada
USA
Switzerland
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202257247
publishing papers in high-impact journals in the field. Questions related to the following 
issues were asked:  
 
(i) 
the concept of publishable articles in computer science high-impact journals;  
(ii) 
knowledge and skills necessary to produce that kind of paper;  
(iii) 
difficulties and limitations that Brazilian computer scientists face during the process of 
producing and publishing research articles, as well as strategies for overcoming them;  
(iv) 
evidence that the papers fit the expected conditions for publication; and  
(v) 
motivation for publishing in high-impact journals in the field.  
 
The questions were structured into an array (Figure 2), adapted from Gordon and Dawes 
(2015). Microsoft Word was used, which was filled in with the participants’ answers. The 
interviewees had access to the array, thanks to Skype’s screen sharing tool, so they could 
actively participate in the process of data gathering, following, and correcting the researcher’s 
interpretation of their answers. That method adopts a second-person perspective, wherein the 
researcher acts as a mediator, helping participants access their subjective experiences by 
questioning them (Keranen et al., 2012). Additionally, it enables a deeper involvement of 
researcher and participant with the data, once both are responsible for the information raised.   
 
Part 2 was conducted as a typical semi-structured interview. Participants were presented with 
data gathered from the analyzed questionnaire regarding contextual factors – such as sexism, 
xenophobia, social and academic bias – that, according to the 38 respondents, might influence 
the publication of papers, as well as to the profile of Brazilian computer scientists who have 
published in refereed journals. Then, they were asked to interpret those findings (cf. Vieira, 
2019b). 
 
The use of ICT in Phase 2 was also substantial for investigating critical issues at a distance. 
Firstly, it made it possible to perpetuate research practices that are typical in face-to-face 
interviews, such as audio and video recording, thanks to a lot of software that is freely 
available on the web. Besides, sharing the screen with the participants in Part 1 was central to 
assuring the second-person perspective for data gathering; moreover, it turned out to be a 
better procedure than the printed version. Once the participant has a full view of the array on 
the screen, s/he can more clearly accompany the data inserted in the array by the researcher 
and comment/correct them instantaneously without needing to erase the paper, and the 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202257247
researcher ends the interview with the data already tabulated in digital version and ready to be 
analyzed.  
 
Figure 2 — Array protocol used in Part 1 of the interview 
 
 
 
Finally, in addition to enabling the researcher to reach participants distant from her, in 
different regions of Brazil and abroad, conducting the interviews online also gave the 
participants the convenience of being interviewed at the best time and place for them. All 
these benefits brought using ICT in the contextual TSA contributed not only to reaching the 
specificity that Needs Analysis requires – discussed above, in the previous subsection – but 
also to assuring the criticism CEAP pedagogy advocates for. Interviewing members of a 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202257247
global community enabled the teacher/researcher to observe and recognize beliefs, behaviors, 
accesses, restrictions, and power relations that the different backgrounds might perpetuate 
among the researchers in the field. Figure 3 shows, divided by region, participants’ evaluation 
of their English knowledge to write academic texts, their international academic experience, 
and how they perceive the level of influence of contextual issues on the acceptance of 
Brazilian computer scientists’ papers by high-impact journals in the field.  
 
Figure 3 — Participants’ evaluation of some critical issues regarding international academic 
writing and publication 
 
 
 
While more than 70% of all interviewees believed they have good/very good command of 
English to write academic papers, and 65% had already had some type of international 
academic experience, the one in northern Brazil presented a bad evaluation of his English 
academic writing and stated that he had never had any type of international experiences. Such 
a difference may be motivated by numerous reasons, including personal ones. Among them, 
the unequal investments in education that the government makes in different states of Brazil 
cannot be ignored.  
 
The website Terra (n.d.) based on data from the National Institute for Educational Studies and 
Research “Anísio Teixeira” (INEP), showed that the Amazon, a northern state in Brazil, 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Good/very
good
command of
English
International
academic
experience
Coauthorship International
partnership
Nationality
Academic
degree
SE - Brazil
S - Brazil
NE - Brazil
N - Brazil
Abroad
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202257247
invested R$ 3,075.89 a year per student while, for instance, Santa Catarina, a southern state, 
invested R$ 6,829.52. Being education a complex system, it is not possible to state that every 
student from the North is lesser prepared for international academic writing than the students 
from the South due to the different public education they get. As elements that influence 
educational practices, however, contextual issues, such as economy and politics, need to be 
considered in the needs analysis for CEAP courses. ICT, as shown in this paper, may help 
teachers/course developers to investigate at a distance how those issues impact specific 
educational contexts. 
 
In this respect, data in Figure 3 also show huge discrepancies among participants located in 
different countries/regions concerning their perception of contextual issues that might 
influence the publication process of computer science high-impact journals. “Having co-
authorship with a well-known researcher in the field” was perceived as a big influence on the 
process by 75% of Brazilians located in the South of the country, and half of the participants 
in the South and the Northeast believed that the level of the researchers’ degrees influences 
their papers’ acceptance. Four of the five contextual factors investigated were considered 
influential to the publication process by the interviewees located in the Southeast, whereas 
just a few participants who were then abroad considered only two factors.  
 
All this information was fundamental for designing tasks to prepare the target students 
(computer science graduate students from around Brazil) better for the different contextual 
limitations and constraints they might face in academia, how to overcome those problems, 
and/or work on solutions to eliminate them, changing research practices and contributing to 
the development of their community. Praxis, then, was also affected by using ICT in the 
contextual TSA, since the possibility of investigating members of a global community 
provided the teacher/researcher with rich information upon which she based her teaching 
practices. This issue is discussed deeply in the next subsection. 
 
Phase 3 – Textual analysis 
 
At the end of the interview, each participant was asked to share with the teacher/researcher a 
received review of papers that had been either accepted or rejected by a computer science 
high-impact journal. By e-mail, 17 texts were sent by them, representing 12 different 
publishing processes – four of which recommended rejection of the paper, and the other eight 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202257247
accepted the work. For data analysis, Huckin’s (2004) content analysis methodology was also 
used, as well as AntConc for raising specific information from the texts.  
 
Carrying out this phase was possible only with the use of ICT. The very concept of research 
article reviews encompasses a digital dimension. Nowadays, academic publishing processes 
are conducted online; thus, all the interactions between editors and authors, editors and 
referees, and editors and editorial boards are via the internet. To have access to these texts, it 
would be necessary for the researcher to use ICT, not only because the authors are in distant 
locations, but because the texts per se are in digital format.  
 
Having access to this material contributed to raising the reliability of the research since 
another perspective on the publication process of high-impact journals in the field could be 
analyzed: that of the referees. The analysis of the reviews showed the most common issues 
that the referees consider to reject or recommend the publication of a paper. Table 3 presents 
an overview of the frequency with which the referees criticized or evidenced authors’ good 
work regarding each unit of analysis investigated. 
 
Table 3 — Categories of factors considered by referees to reject and accept manuscripts for 
publication in computer science high-impact journals 
 
Categories 
Recommendation 
to reject 
Recommendation 
to accept 
Contextual - positive 
90% 
63% 
Contextual - negative 
90% 
50% 
Textual - positive 
60% 
57% 
Textual - negative 
60% 
63% 
Linguistic - positive 
0% 
13% 
Linguistic - negative 
40% 
28% 
Publishing process - positive 
10% 
18% 
Publishing process - negative 
20% 
13% 
Formatting - negative 
10% 
31% 
 
The referees most often commented on contextual issues related to the conduction of the 
research, such as “originality”, “contribution to existing knowledge”, and “impact of results”, 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202257247
either for rejecting the paper (90%) or recommending its publication (50–63%). Textual 
issues regarding the selection and organization of information in the paper, like “quality of 
cited work”, “clarity of the methodology”, and “accuracy of data analysis”, were the second 
most mentioned, for either criticizing (60-63%) them or evidencing the authors’ good work 
(57–60%). Finally, linguistic issues concerning “syntax”, “spelling” and “coherence” were the 
least mentioned, followed by formatting and issues related to the publishing process.  
 
This information helped the teacher/researcher understand the order of relevance of each 
investigated factor (contextual, textual, linguistic, etc.) to the acceptance/rejection of Brazilian 
computer scientists’ papers by high-impact journals. It is clear, in Table 3, that, although a 
good ability to write papers in English is considered in the referees’ reviews, it is not a 
defining criterion for recommending the publication of the paper or not. Rather, the validity 
and originality of the work are what counts more, followed by clarity, organization, and 
accuracy of the information in the manuscript. After assessing students’ present situation, the 
teacher/researcher could plan an appropriate syllabus and design effective tasks to fulfill 
students’ needs (cf. Vieira, 2019a).  
 
5. Conclusion 
 
This paper aimed to discuss the benefits of using ICT to conduct a contextual TSA at a 
distance. Results show that this use was essential for two main reasons: besides facilitating 
data analysis through multiple computer programs, such as Microsoft Word, Microsoft Excel, 
and AntConc, they enabled the researcher to gather data at a distance and to ensure the 
specificity, praxis, and criticism that CEAP pedagogy advocates for. 
 
First, the conduction of a global investigation of the target discourse community responded to 
the specific needs of the target audience: students from around Brazil who need to share their 
research results with their peers located around the globe. Those different backgrounds have 
led to distinct experiences with academic literacy and publication, which could be properly 
investigated at a distance, expanding the scope of the contextual TSA as well as saving time 
and resources in course preparation.  
 
As far as criticism is concerned, ICT made possible the investigation of, among other things, 
the experience and beliefs of members of this global discourse community concerning the 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202257247
conduct and sharing of research in computer science. Results helped the teacher/researcher 
understand the causes of the contextual specificities identified, and their influence on the 
engagement of Brazilian researchers with international peers. 
 
Finally, this investigation conducted using ICT tools and instruments informed the 
teacher/researcher on how to better select and organize content in the syllabus of the course, 
according to their level of relevance in manuscript analysis by referees. Thus, they 
substantiated the teacher/researcher praxis, once they provided relevant information, which 
she used to plan, organize, and conduct her teaching practice (Vieira, 2019a). The use of ICT, 
as shown in this paper, makes possible a wider contextual investigation of the TSA, reaching 
not only a local but also a global community with which students need to engage during their 
academic practices. 
 
In Brazil, a continental developing country that is just starting the internationalization process 
of universities and where there barely are academic writing courses to help students in this 
task, online EAP/CEAP courses may represent the only opportunity for these novice 
researchers to develop their academic writing skills. However, the design of such courses may 
be a big challenge for teachers and course developers, due to social, cultural, ideological, and 
economic discrepancies among different regions of the country. To assure the specificity ESP 
pedagogy advocates for, present and target situation analysis must also investigate contextual 
issues regarding discursive practices in the target discourse community in each region where 
students are from. Carrying out this investigation in locus, in this case, may be time- and 
resource-demanding. Contextual TSA at a distance, then, appears as the best solution to 
assure specificity, criticism, and praxis for the design of courses that fully attend to students’ 
needs and wants with fewer investments, which is only possible thanks to ICT.  
 
At this point, it is necessary to consider that, although ICT makes possible the improvement 
of contextual TSA for reaching a global discourse community, it may also limit such an 
improvement in regions and countries where teachers and course developers have no access to 
them. Unfortunately, the scientific equity that CEAP aims to promote among students 
depends on an array of factors that are out of instructors’ control. It is important, however, 
that ESP teachers and practitioners keep on searching for ways to bring more access to 
underrepresented minorities through language courses. As Bazerman et al. (2009, pp. XIV) 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202257247
remember, “advancing the communicative competence of all, making available the genres of 
power and cooperation, is a matter of social capacity and social justice”. 
 
Acknowledgements 
This research was carried out with the support of Coordination of Superior Level Staff 
Improvement (CAPES) (funding code 001); and The São Paulo Research Foundation 
(FAPESP) (funding codes 15/11088-1 and 16/06589-4). My sincere acknowledgements to 
Lecturer Norman Douglas Bradley, from University of California in Santa Barbara, for kindly 
proofreading this paper.  
 
Ethics Committee Approval Statement 
 
This investigation was approved by the Research Ethics Committee from UNESP – Instituto 
de Biociências Letras e Ciências Exatas on March 23, 2017. 
 
Conflict of interests 
 
The corresponding author has no conflict of interest to declare and bears full responsibility 
for the submission. 
 
References  
 
Aaker, D. A., & Day, G. S. (1990). Marketing Research (4th. ed.). John Wiley & Sons. 
Aranha, S. (2009). The development of a genre-based writing course for graduate students in 
two fields. In C. Bazerman, A. Bonini, & D. Figueiredo (Eds.), Genre in a changing world 
(pp. 465-482). (10th ed.). The WAC Clearinghouse and Parlor Press. 
Aranha, S., & Vieira, B. G. A. M. (2018). Conhecimento de língua, gênero e registro 
acadêmicos em foco: atividades na análise de necessidades de um curso de EAP para pós-
graduandos em ciência da computação. In: M. M. FERREIRA, & V. C. R. STELLA (Orgs.). 
Redação acadêmica: múltiplos olhares para o ensino da escrita acadêmica em português 
e línguas estrangeiras (pp. 191-220). 1st. ed. Humanitas. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202257247
Arnó-Macià, E., & Rueda-Ramos, C. (2011). Promoting reflection on science, technology, 
and society among engineering students through an EAP online learning environment. 
Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 10(1), 19-31. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2010.12.004  
Bazerman, C., Bonini, A., & Figueiredo, D. (Eds.). (2009). Genre in a changing world (10th 
ed.). The WAC Clearinghouse and Parlor Press. 
Benesch, S. (1996). Needs Analysis and curriculum development in EAP: an example of a 
critical approach. TESOL Quarterly, 30, 723-738. 
Benesch, S. (2001). Critical English for academic purposes. Blackwell Publishing Ltda. 
Benesch, S. (2009). Theorizing and practicing critical English for academic purposes. Journal 
of English for Academic Purposes, 8(2), 81-85. https://doi.org/10.10161j jeap.2008.09 .002  
Bloch, J. (2012).  Technology in ESP. In B. Paltridge, & S. Starfield (Eds.), The handbook of 
English for specific purposes (pp. 385-402). John Wiley & Sons. 
Cheng, A. (2008). Analyzing genre exemplars in preparation for writing: The case of an L2 
graduate student in the ESP genre-based instructional framework of academic literacy. 
Applied Linguistics, 29(1), 50-71. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amm021  
Chun, C. W. (2009). Contesting neoliberal discourses in EAP: Critical praxis in an IEP 
classroom. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 8(2), 111-120. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2008.09.005  
Dehnad, A., Bagherzadeh, R., Bigdeli, S., Hatami, K., & Hosseini, F. (2010). Syllabus 
revision: a needs analysis Study. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 9, 1307-1312. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2010.12.325  
Eckhaus, R. (2018). Supporting the adoption of business case studies in ESP instruction 
through technology. The Asian ESP Journal, 14, 280-298. 
Ferreira, M. M.; Lousada, E. G. (2016). Ações do Laboratório de Letramento Acadêmico da 
USP: promovendo a escrita acadêmica na graduação e na pós-graduação. Ilha do Desterro, 
69(3), 125-140. https://doi.org/10.5007/2175-8026.2016v69n3p125  
Flowerdew, J., & Peacock, M. (2001). Research perspectives on English for academic 
purposes. Cambridge University Press. 
Gordon, D., & Dawes, G. (2005). Expanding your world: Modeling the structure of 
experience. Desert Rain. 
Ha, A. Y. H., & Hyland, K. (2017). What is technicality? A Technicality Analysis Model for 
EAP vocabulary. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 28, 35-49. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2017.06.003  
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202257247
Hara, N., & Kling, R. (2000). Student distress in a web-based distance education course. 
Information, Communication & Society, 3(4), 557-579. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/13691180010002297  
Huckin, T. (2004). Content analysis: what texts talk about. In C. Bazerman, & P. Prior (Eds.). 
What writing does and how it does it: An introduction to analyzing texts and textual practices 
(pp. 13-32). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Hyland, K. (2002). Specificity revisited: how far should we go? English for Specific 
Purposes, 21, 385-395. 
Hyland, K. (2007). English for specific purposes. In J. Cummins, & C. Davidson, 
International handbook of English language teaching (pp. 391-402). Springer. 
Karagiorgi, Y. (2005). Throwing light into the black box of implementation: ICT in Cyprus 
elementary schools. Educational Media International, 42(1), 19-32. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/09523980500116654 
Keranen, N., Encinas, F., & Bazerman, C. (2012). Immersed in the game of science: beliefs, 
emotions, and strategies of NNES scientists who regularly publish in English. In C. Bazerman 
(Eds.). International advances in writing research: cultures, places and measures (pp. 387-
402). The WAC Clearinghouse and Parlor Press. 
Khosrowjerdi, M. (2011). Designing a viable scientific communication model: VSM 
approach. Library Hi Tech, 29(2), 359-372. 
Kumaravadivelu, B. (2001). Toward a postmethod pedagogy. TESOL quarterly, 35(4), 537-
560. https://doi.org/10.2307/3588427 
Lam, Y. (2000). Technophilia vs. technophobia: A preliminary look at why second-language 
teachers do or do not use technology in their classrooms. Canadian Modern Language 
Review, 56(3), 389-420. 
Larsen-Freeman, D. (1997). Chaos: complexity science and second language acquisition. 
Applied Linguistics, 18(2), 141-165. 
Mason, M. (2008). What is complexity theory and what are its implications for educational 
change? Educational Philosophy and Theory, 40(1), 35–49. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-
5812.2007.00413.x   
Molle, D., & Prior, P. (2008). Multimodal genre systems in EAP writing pedagogy: 
Reflecting on a needs analysis. Tesol Quarterly, 42(4), 541-566. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1545-7249.2008.tb00148.x 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202257247
Morgan, B. (2009). Fostering transformative practitioners for critical EAP: Possibilities and 
challenges. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 8(2), 86-99. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2008.09.001  
Oliveira, E. F. T., & Grácio, M.C.C. (2005). Análise a respeito do tamanho de amostras 
aleatórias simples: uma aplicação na área de Ciência da Informação. DataGramaZero Revista 
de Ciência da Informação, João Pessoa, 6(3), 1-11. 
Sahraini, Syamsudarni. (2018). Helping Slamic Higher Education Students Learn Listening 
Skills by Using Video-cast. The Asian ESP Journal, 14(7.2), 176-194. 
Sarmento, M. E. D. R. (2012). Análise de necessidades de inglês para fins específicos em um 
curso de graduação em turismo [Master's thesis, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do 
Norte]. UFRN Campus Repository. https://repositorio.ufrn.br/handle/123456789/16227  
Songhori, M. H. (2008). Introduction to needs analysis. English for Specific Purposes World, 
7(4), 1-25. 
Supatranont, P. (2012). Developing a writing template of research article abstracts: A corpus-
based method. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 66, 144-156. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2012.11.256  
Swales, J. M. (1990). Genre Analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge 
University Press. 
Terra. (n.d.). Investimento da Educação Pública. Retrieved January 30, 2020, from 
http://noticias.terra.com.br/educacao/infograficos/gasto-publico-educacao/  
Warschauer, M. (2002). Reconceptualizing the digital divide. First monday, 7(7). 
https://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/download/967/888?inline=1  
Warschauer, M. (2003). Demystifying the digital divide. Scientific American, 289(2), 42-47. 
Vieira, B. G. A. M. (2014). Passos para a elaboração de um curso de EAP para pós-
graduandos em Ciência da Computação [Master's thesis, São Paulo State University]. 
UNESP Campus Repository. https://repositorio.unesp.br/handle/11449/122198  
Vieira, B. G. A. M. (2017). Genre knowledge in the needs analysis process: using a writing 
activity to assess present situation. Revista Trama (UNIOESTE online), 13, 29-53. 
Vieira, B. G. A. M. (2019a). Do crítico ao complexo: uma pedagogia em inglês para fins 
específicos para a promoção do letramento acadêmico de pós-graduandos brasileiros a 
distância [Doctoral Dissertation, São Paulo State University]. UNESP Campus Repository. 
https://repositorio.unesp.br/bitstream/handle/11449/182147/vieira_bgam_dr_sjrp.pdf?sequenc
e=5&isAllowed=y  
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202257247
Vieira, B. G. A. M. (2019b). A pedagogia crítico-complexa e a análise da situação-alvo: 
investigando preconceitos e privilégios na academia. Revista do GEL, 16, 140-164. 
https://doi.org/10.21165/gel.v16i3.2772  
Vieira, B. G. A. M. (2020). Present situation analysis within critical-complex pedagogy: 
surfing the text, the context and the discourse. Letras, 125-150. 
https://doi.org/10.5902/2176148543333  
Vieira, B. G. A. M, & Aranha, S. (2015a). O primeiro passo na trajetória da elaboração de um 
curso de EAP para pós-graduandos em Ciência da Computação: análise de necessidades. 
Entretextos (UEL), 15, 139-171. 
Vieira, B. G. A. M, & Aranha, S. (2015b). A Análise de Necessidades na trajetória da 
elaboração de um curso de EAP para pós-graduandos em ciência da computação. The 
ESPecialist, 36, 49-72. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-460x202257247
This preprint was submitted under the following conditions: 
The authors declare that they are aware that they are solely responsible for the content of the preprint and
that the deposit in SciELO Preprints does not mean any commitment on the part of SciELO, except its
preservation and dissemination.
The authors declare that the necessary Terms of Free and Informed Consent of participants or patients in
the research were obtained and are described in the manuscript, when applicable.
The authors declare that the preparation of the manuscript followed the ethical norms of scientific
communication.
The authors declare that the data, applications, and other content underlying the manuscript are
referenced.
The deposited manuscript is in PDF format.
The authors declare that the research that originated the manuscript followed good ethical practices and
that the necessary approvals from research ethics committees, when applicable, are described in the
manuscript.
The authors declare that once a manuscript is posted on the SciELO Preprints server, it can only be taken
down on request to the SciELO Preprints server Editorial Secretariat, who will post a retraction notice in its
place.
The authors agree that the approved manuscript will be made available under a Creative Commons CC-BY
license.
The submitting author declares that the contributions of all authors and conflict of interest statement are
included explicitly and in specific sections of the manuscript.
The authors declare that the manuscript was not deposited and/or previously made available on another
preprint server or published by a journal.
If the manuscript is being reviewed or being prepared for publishing but not yet published by a journal, the
authors declare that they have received authorization from the journal to make this deposit.
The submitting author declares that all authors of the manuscript agree with the submission to SciELO
Preprints.
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
