Objective: to assess the effect of changes on Primary Care policies on the trend in 
hospitalization rates for Ambulatory Conditions Sensitive to Primary Care in the city of Rio de 
Janeiro, Brazil. 

Study design: It´s an ecological study with data from Brazilian National Health 
Information System.  

Methods: We performed interrupted time series analysis, comparing 3 
different periods due to primary care policies in Brazil: 2008-2009; 2010-2017 and 2018-2019. 
Dataset included total ACSC and rates for 19 group of conditions. 

Results: There was a non-significant increasing trend in baseline admissions. The reform impacted (policy #1) the 
change in trend, causing it to reduce in the period significantly. However, the change in the 
PNAB (policy #2) did not change the trend but reduced the rate of decline. Trends and 
differences among periods vary due to ACSC group. 

Conclusion: Primary care is sensitive to 
changes in public health policies. The hospitalization rate for ambulatory care sensitive 
conditions is an indicator that reflects the changes and the adaptability of the organization of 
the health service network to guarantee universal coverage and to attend the population's 
demand. 

Primary Health Care (PHC) is the World Health Organization´ strategy to achieve 
increased access and quality of care for populations1. It has been used for strengthening 
health systems in many countries, as the most appropriate response to the epidemiological 
and demographic transition experienced in these places2,3. Brazil has published the first 
version of the National Primary Care Policy (PNAB) in 20064. This historic milestone expands 
primary care, from the level of a health program to a strategy, named the Family Health 
Strategy (FHS)5. Its main features are team and territory-based continuous care, with strong 
family and community orientation and the formal engagement of community members in the 
teams (Health Community Agents)6.  

Despite the publication of the policy, Rio de Janeiro (second largest Brazilian city) 
did not adopt it globally at first, but in clusters of extreme poverty and assistance voids. By 
2009, only 7% of the population had access to FHS services7. The Primary Health Care Reform 
(RCAPS) of Rio de Janeiro, initiated in 2009, was a response by the city government for this 
gap8,9. From late 2009 to 2016, robust investment in PHC led to expansion of services and 
increase in population coverage to 60% of the population10. However, in 2017, Brazilian 
Ministry of Health released a new version of the National PHC Policy, bringing a lot of 
conceptual and operational changes, most of them seen as detrimental for sustainability of 
the FHS11,12. 

Positive effects of PHC coverage have been documented in recent studies, using 
selected impact health indicators, such as mortality in special groups (children, chronic 
disease)13,14. Another indicator often used for monitoring PHC quality is rate of 
hospitalizations due to Ambulatory Care Sensitive Conditions (ACSC)15. It represents a set of 
health problems for which the significant action of PHC would decrease the risk of 
hospitalizations. According to Macinko et al16, this indicator is seldom used to evaluate 
services in low- and middle-income countries. High rates of ACSC can be related to problems 
of access, coverage, or low efficiency in this level of care17,18. Data reliability and accessibility 
in public databases favors the use of ACSC hospitalization rate to assess PHC services, focusing 
on implementation and coverage effect, as shown in some author’s recent work19,20.  

The effect of Rio de Janeiro’s FHS expansion on ACSC hospitalization rate was 
reported by Santos et al21 who compared the results before and after the RCAPS and showed 
a correlation between the expansion of FHS coverage and the decrease in this rate. On the 
same way, a comparative study of hospitalization rates due to ACSC in national capitals points 
out that the municipality of Rio de Janeiro had a more significant reduction in the last ten 
years, around 13.4%3. 

The city of Rio de Janeiro is the best example in Latin America to demonstrate this 
rapid expansion. In this sense, this study aims to assess the effect of the Primary Health Care 
Reform and the effect of recent National Policy changes on the trend in hospitalization rates 
for Ambulatory Conditions Sensitive to Primary Care in the city of Rio de Janeiro. 

It is a time-series study conducted in the city of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. The city of Rio 
de Janeiro has a history of expanding primary care coverage that has served as a successful 
case for the study of primary care in Brazil and the Americas20. We use data from the 
Department of Health, which contains monthly information on the number of hospitalizations 
in units of the public health system, which has universal coverage, for each disease code, 
between 2008 and 2019, to assess hospitalization trends in three periods of great importance 
for primary care in the municipality: the period between January 2008 and December 2009, 
which corresponds to the period before the reorganization of the municipality's primary care, 
called Primary Health Care Reform (RCAPS); the period between January 2010 and December 
2017, which corresponds to the period of this reorganization; and the period between January 
2018 and December 2019, which corresponds to the beginning of the changes brought about 
by the new National Primary Care Policy (PNAB). 

We restricted the number of hospitalizations to 74 causes, according to the two-digit 
classification of the International Classification of Diseases. We focus on the causes 
established by National Ordinance No. 221 of 2008, which sets the list of admissions for 
conditions sensitive to primary care (Supplementary Material #1). 

We calculated the hospitalization rate as follows: <> 

Usually, rates are presented for 10,000 inhabitants. However, as we carry out analyzes 
by groups of causes, and some are infrequent, we chose to increase the base to 100,000 
inhabitants. Also, we highlight that groups 17 and 19 on the list correspond to exclusively 
female causes. Thus, the denominator of these rates was only the female population. 
Therefore, the total rate is the result of the sum of the rates of the groups, according to the 
formula: <> 

We conducted an exploration of the data for the 19 groups of causes in the three 
periods. To do this, we calculate the means, standard deviations, and measures of variability 
(quartiles) for each pair at the three periods. In this way, we visually inspect these 
measurements, using box plots for each group in the three periods. We were able to compare 
the groups with the average and standard deviation measurements. So that we could assume 
that this comparison of means was valid, we analyzed the normality of the distribution data 
using the Shapiro-Wilk adherence test. We used an inferential statistic known as the Levene 
test to accept the homoscedasticity of data distribution. Finally, we were interested not only 
in whether there was a statistically significant difference between groups but also in 
understanding the difference between pairs of groups (period one vs. period 2; period one vs. 
period three and period two vs. period 3). Thus, we chose not only to use the ANOVA test but 
a Post-Hoc test. For that, we used the Tukey test. 

Once we completed this first stage, we performed a visual inspection of the time series 
to recognize changes in the pattern of total hospitalizations and groups within the three 
periods, considering the sequential information from the three periods previously described. 
We used segmented linear regression models of interrupted time series (ITS) to determine the 
effect of changes in primary care policy across all ACSC groups. When estimating the effects, 
ITS models adjust to pre-existing trends before the policy change and can detect changes in 
the pattern and level of the trend. We built the segmented linear regression models using the 
Prais method. The models included three segments, referring to the periods previously 
described. We adjusted the baseline segment (January 2008 to December 2009) with an 
intercept and a trend estimate variable. 

We assume that, due to the different nature of the causes included in the list, some 
could have an immediate impact due to changes in primary care policy, and others a gradual 
change. In this way, we tested two effects between trends: we tested differences in the slope 
of hospitalizations from an interrupted time series analysis of two groups (ramp effect). We 
also evaluated the change in the level of trends between groups (step effect). 

Since hospitalizations are the result of acute illness or worsening of chronic disease, 
and the effect can be rapid, we choose not to use time lag between policy change and 
observation of outcomes. We highlight the results with statistical significance at a level of 5%. 
Besides, we tested logarithmic trend terms to assess possible non-linear trends obtained by 
the Prais model. With the results, we used the BIC and AIC aptitude criteria for the choice. 
Finally, we test the suitability of each model for residual analysis. To detect the presence of 
autocorrelation in the residue lag (forecast errors), we used the Durbin-Watson statistic. We 
performed the analyzes in the R program, version 3.6.1. 

Initially, we performed a visual inspection of the measures and dispersion measures 
(Figure 1). We were able to verify six different behaviors, considering the comparison between 
the baseline (Period # 1) and the RCAPS period (Period # 2), and between the RCAPS period 
(Period # 2) and the PNA period (Period # #) 3). First, with an initial drop in average rates and 
subsequent maintenance of the level, the pattern of total rates and groups of hypertension, 
angina, epilepsy, and female pelvic inflammatory diseases. The second pattern is of groups in 
which there is a decline in the two comparisons: vaccine-preventable diseases, infectious 
gastroenteritis, bacterial pneumonia, and diabetes. The third pattern is of groups in which 
there is an initial increase, followed by a reduction: nutritional deficiencies, gastrointestinal 
ulcers and diseases related to prenatal and puerperium. The fourth pattern is of groups with 
initial reduction and posterior increase: asthma and lung diseases. The fifth pattern is grouped 
with an increase in the two comparisons: cerebrovascular diseases, kidney infection and 
urinary tract and skin. Finally, the last pattern is that of groups in which there was no apparent 
change: anemia, ear, nose and throat infections and heart failure. 

Visual inspection only suggests changes between periods, but it is not a determining 
factor in assessing consistency. Then, we checked if the differences in the means were 
significant (Table 1). The average rates of hospitalization for conditions sensitive to primary 
care decreased significantly between the previous period and during the reform of primary 
care in Rio de Janeiro (Post-Hoc p-value <0.001). The average continued to decline in the 
period following the publication of the new national primary care policy. However, it was not 
a significant reduction compared to the reform stage. (Post-Hoc p-value = 0.504). We found 
that this pattern was similar for specific hospitalizations for bacterial pneumonia, 
hypertension, cerebrovascular diseases, diabetes mellitus and gastrointestinal ulcer.  

The measures presented refer to point estimates. They give us initial suggestions for 
describing trends. We performed then a visual inspection of the temporal trends in the three 
periods of study (Figure 2). The illustration of time-series suggests a slight increase in the trend 
in the first period, with a tendency of reduction during the RCAPS, and maintenance of 
reduction with PNAB. However, it occurs with a change in the rate level. We point out that 
RCAPS reflected a reduction in rates for most groups. Regarding PNAB, there was a change in 
the previous trend. It suggests that, for some causes, the new PNAB changed the flow for 
detection and treatment. 

We observed the magnitude of changes in the trend (Table 2). The most notable 
changes occurred during the RCAPS period. For the total rate, there was a non-significant 
increase in baseline admissions. The reform impacted the change in trend, causing it to reduce 
in the period significantly. The change in the PNAB did not change the trend but reduced the 
rate of decline. Also, the coefficient is no longer significant, suggesting that the monitoring of 
the historical series for a long time may show a reversal of the downward trend in some 
months. Some groups follow the same pattern as the total rate. We highlight vaccine-
preventable diseases, nutritional deficiencies, diabetes, and gastrointestinal ulcers. We also 
highlight diseases with a consistent reduction in the three periods, with a more extended 
adaptation to changes. It is the case of hypertension, which initially reduced the speed of falls 
during RCAPS, but substantially increased the speed after implementing the new PNAB. Still, 
we highlight diseases related to childbirth and the puerperium, which initially tended to 
increase. The speed of increase decreased during the RCAPS, and the new PNAB changed the 
trend, becoming a trend reduction. 

Finally, we checked if the observed changes were significant, considering the effects of 
step (change in the level of the result immediately after the policy) and ramp (change of trend 
in the post-political segment) (Table 3). The data confirm that the most consistent change in 
the trend occurred between the baseline and the RCAPS. We found that the total rate showed 
a change in the slope, followed by almost all groups, except the nose, ear and throat infection, 
lung diseases, epilepsy, kidney and urinary tract infection, skin infection and female pelvic 
inflammatory disease. Also, it is essential to note that the change to diseases related to 
childbirth and the puerperium was an increase in the hospitalization rate, unlike the others, 
which was a reduction. For nutritional deficiencies, asthma, angina, urinary tract infection and 
gastrointestinal ulcers, the change was immediate, as seen in the step effect. The change 
between RCAPS and PNAB was less impactful, significant only for asthma, hypertension, 
epilepsy, and skin infections (level) and angina, epilepsies and diseases related to childbirth 
and the puerperium (slope). The verification of the residues shows that the models were well 
adjusted (goodness-of-fit and Durbin-Watson Statistics). 

The definition of lists of ACSCs generally comprises systematic reviews of the literature 
and consensual expert opinions. The Brazilian ACSC list is one of the most complete globally. 
These causes are an important source of pressure for the health system22. The reduction in 
the overall rate of ACSC associated with RCAPS in the city corroborates findings already 
documented in studies carried out in Rio de Janeiro21 and in other places in the country3. Some 
groups can respond more quickly to the implementation of PHC services. In the short term, 
the most significant access to health services contributes to avoiding hospitalizations in 
situations with strong social determination, such as nutritional deficiencies; and health 
problems with clinical management at the PHC itself, such as urinary tract infections; and 
stabilization of chronic diseases, such as asthma and hypertension23,24. 

The slighter decrease in certain groups suggests less immediate impact due to 
conditions that require specialized attention, such as epilepsy and lung diseases. The 
exception to this rule is the conditions already traditionally discussed at this level of care, 
which has a referenced network, such as asthma25,26. On the other hand, the behavior of 
chronic hospitalizations such as diabetes reinforces their condition as a sensitive cause to the 
provision of organized PHC services27. We believe that the effect on these chronic conditions 
tends to manifest itself over time19. 

The trend in hospitalizations for obstetric causes 2017 suggests that hospitalizations 
for such causes increase with the expansion of care coverage at this level of attention. This 
phenomenon is possibly related to the increase in access to health services, leading to more 
significant detection of problems that lead to hospitalization28. Non-significant changes for 
conditions such as anemia and infections of the nose, ear and throat reinforce evidence from 
previous studies17,20. We believe that these causes may not be potentially sensitive to care at 
this level of care. 

The decrease in the general rate of ICSAP showed a slight in its velocity, coinciding with 
the revision of PNAB in 2017. The trend remains, but with less significance. This evidence 
suggests that the stagnation or increase in hospitalizations for these conditions may affect the 
changes caused directly or indirectly by the expected changes in the PNAB, as described in 
other studies29. Since the beginning of the municipal government in force in Rio de Janeiro, 
the cost-benefit and real impact of PHC coverage implemented in the ten years before its 
assumption have been questioned by a little experienced technical team. The consequence of 
this context is the revision of management contracts, the evasion of professionals, difficulty 
maintaining assistance flows, and population coverage reduction. The impact of this financial 
and political crisis has been documented in the literature30,31. The PHC contributed to the 
improvement in the ACSC indicator, with effects on access and equity and results almost 
reaching the levels observed in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 
countries32. Although there is still plenty of room for improvement, the evidence is clear that 
PHC is a powerful approach to health care organization in Brazil33.  

The study has limitations. There is some difficulty in conducting impact analysis on 
public policies, especially in low-and middle-income countries, due to two phenomena. First, 
although policies are designed to reduce inequities, they initially widen disparities between 
social classes. It is due to that newly introduced health interventions are initially adopted by 
the population's wealthiest segments, who are likely to need them less. Therefore, we observe 
that absolute inequalities in health increase in the short term and only decrease as the 
intervention gradually reaches the population's poorest sectors. This phenomenon is known 
as reverse equity34. However, the study by Guimarães35 identified that this effect is not 
observed in primary care. Also, there is a gap in the generation of longitudinal data that allows 
comparison over time since the quality of the data is compromised with each change in health 
management systems. 

Finally, it is essential to note that the latest change in the PNAB is recent. Therefore, 
findings without statistical significance for the period after the year 2017 should be viewed 
with caution. According to many authors, the new document jeopardized the country's 
model's consolidation, mainly through the flexibilization of the parameters regarding the 
number of families covered by each team and its composition. It also left the city government 
to decide whether to comply with the FHS, allowing it to use other models of PHC36-38.  

The decrease of the ACSC rate in the city of Rio de Janeiro suggests a possible effect of 
the changes induced by the new PNAB. Federal flexibility of public policies possibly allows for 
misguided and little evidence-based decision-making for the management of local resources. 
It directly impacts the population's health and increases the risk of hospitalizations for 
manageable causes in PHC. We also believe that more studies related to this indicator should 
be carried out to assess PHC. It allows us to assess groups' suitability as sensitive to care at 
this level of care, such as anemias and nose, throat, and ear infections. In the end, the world 
can learn some lessons from the Brazilian experience. Community-based primary care can 
work if done correctly. 

This work was supported by Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, Programa INOVA – Ideias 
Inovadoras.(grant number VPPIS-001-FIO-18-74) 
