The spread of Coronavirus is causing in the society all around the world a considerable degree of 
fear, worry and concern and particularly among healthcare workers that are at increased risk for infection. 
This paper gathers the strategy/guidelines to reduce the contamination in Intensive care unit (ICU) and in all 
the hospital environment. The ASHRAE and REHVA guidelines applied the UV-C Lamps, Pressure control 
filtration, Restroom actions and Humidity control to reduce the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) in ICU. The 
role of infection control in the design of hospitals is increasing every day. This paper highlights the role of 
heating, ventilating and air-conditioning minimizing the risk of infection from airborne transmission within the 
built environment through the application of best practices. 

Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) was initially identified in an outbreak of viral pneumonia in Wuhan, 
Republic of China, in December 2019. The epidemiology of COVID-19 has recently become clearer as 
incident cases continue to rise and researchers refine estimates of the severity, transmissibility, and 
populations affected. The spread of Coronavirus is causing in the society all around the world a considerable 
degree of fear, worry and concern, with around one hundred thousand people being infected worldwide daily 
[1, 2]. 

Health workers are at the front line of the COVID-19 outbreak response and as such they are exposed 
to hazards that put them at risk of infection. Hazards include pathogen exposure, long working hours, 
psychological distress, fatigue, occupational burnout, stigma, and physical and psychological violence [3]. 

Protecting health care workers and preparedness of Intensive care units (ICUs) to face an epidemic 
cluster should be the main priority. The role of healthcare workers in the transmission of pathogens from 
patient-to-patient is well documented, however, increasing evidence reports the contaminated environment 
as highly significant in pathogen transmission; in particular, high-touch surfaces are recognized as a possible 
reservoir of infectious agents. Thus, healthcare workers are at increased risk for infection [4, 5, 6]. 

Epidemics have the potential to severely strain intensive care resources and may require an increase in 
intensive care capability. Few intensivists have direct experience of rapidly expanding intensive care services 
in response to an epidemic. Early preparations should include fit testing of negative pressure respirators, 
training of reserve staff, sourcing of material for physical modifications to the ICU, among other [7]. 

Brazil has 50 thousand ICU beds enabled in January, with only 22 thousand of them available through 
Health Unit System (SUS). The others are from hospitals that provide care only through payment or 
agreements. According to the Globo journal, a total of 199,768 professionals were identified as suspected 
cases of the disease and needed to be dismissed [8]. 

In a state of Brazil (Pernambuco), 1/3 of infected people with coronavirus arehealthcare workers. The 
Health Secretariat of Pernambuco points out that 377 health professionals tested positive for COVID-19. The 
number represents one in three cases of the disease registered across the state. The high number is the 
result of being the first state in the country to test all symptomatic health professionals [9]. 

The use of face masks has become ubiquitous in the world. The Disposable N95 respirators and medical 
masks are both worn by for healthcare workers self-protection. However, these masks have different intended 
uses. N95 respirators are designed to prevent the wearer from inhaling small airborne particles. Thus, they 
must meet filtration requirements, and fit tightly to the wearer’s face, limiting facial seal leakage. Medical 
masks are intended to prevent microorganism transmission from the wearer to the patient. Medical masks fit 
the face loosely and do not reliably prevent inhalation of small airborne particles [10]. 

The coronavirus found in a hospital air duct has led scientists to believe the disease could be spread 
through air-conditioning units, making it more contagious than initially thought. Evidence of COVID-19 has 
been found in air conditioning vents in some hospitals, raising the question regarding filtration systems for 
many buildings [7, 11]. 

Pathogen dissemination through the air occurs through droplets and aerosols typically generated by 
coughing, sneezing, shouting, breathing, toilet flushing, and some medical procedures. Ventilation systems 
cannot interrupt the rapid settling of large droplets and they can influence the transmission of droplet nuclei 
infectious aerosols. Directional airflow can create clean-to-dirty flow patterns and move infectious aerosols 
to be exhausted [12, 13]. 

This paper gathers the strategy/guidelines to reduce the contamination in Intensive care unit (ICU) and 
in all the hospital environment. 

The transmission routes of the infectious agent must be assessed. In relation to COVID-19, the 
standard assumption is that the following two transmission routes are dominant: via large droplets 
(droplets/particles emitted when sneezing or coughing or talking) and via surface (fomite) contact (hand-
hand, hand-surface etc.). A third transmission route that is gaining more attention from the scientific 
community is the fecal-oral route [14]. Table 1 includes the relation between aerosol droplets size and 
exposure time. The droplets can be: 

Large droplets (> 10 microns): Airborne transmission through large droplets that are released and fall 
to surfaces no further than 1-2 meters from the infected person. Droplets are formed from coughing and 
sneezing. 

Small particles (< 5 microns): These may stay airborne for hours and can be transported long distances. 
They are generated through coughing, sneezing or talking. Small particles (droplet nuclei or residue) form 
from droplets that evaporate and desiccate. The coronavirus particle is 0.80-0.16 micrometer and remains 
active in common indoor air conditions for up to three hours and two to three days on room surfaces. These 
small particles can stay airborne and travel long distances by airflows in the room or via air ducts of ventilation 
systems. 

In hospitals, air conditioning can play a role beyond the promotion of comfort. In many cases, proper 
air conditioning is a factor in patient therapy. Patients in well-controlled environments generally show more 
rapid physical improvement than those in poorly controlled environments [15]. 

The healthcare services should have permanent quality and safety strategies/guidelines. For example, 
the planning strategies are fundamental to carry out urgent operations during the pandemic, allowing the 
minimum required people in the surgical room, thus preventing the risk of contamination of other individuals 
[16]. 

With the aim of protecting health-care workers, critically ill patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-
19 infection should ideally be admitted to an airborne infection isolation room that is at negative pressure, as 
shown in Figure 1. The American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers 
(ASHRAE) recommended to use Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems that can protect 
healthcare workers and instill confidence by providing safe environment for their interactions with most 
contagious patients and reduce exposure when patients discharge contaminants during procedure. However, 
it is recognized that changing the outdoor air amount might impact building pressure balance and also create 
humidity issues. As stated before, the small size of a coronavirus particleallow it to stay airborne and travel 
long distances carried by airflows in the rooms or in the extract air ducts of ventilation systems [17]. 

Figure 1 shows several approaches to change the pressure or filtration system in the ICU room 
available in the Standard 170 “COVID-19 Guidance” for Hospital Isolation Rooms [18] that advises on HVAC 
systems, configurations, and modifications to handle a potential surge in COVID-19 patients. 

First and second options showed in Figure 1 a) and Figure 1 b) respectively, the duct discharges to 
the exterior. Option 1 complies with CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention of the United States 
of America), ASHRAE and FGI (Facility Guidelines Institute). If the room is equipped with High Efficiency 
Particulate Arrestance (HEPA) units (Option 2), discharging can also be made to the exterior. 

Third option shown in Figure 1 cb) shows in room fan (NON- HEPA) discharging directly to exterior or 
use existing TLT room exhaust. 

Fourth option shown in Figure 1 c) shows in room HEPA discharging to return. Systems must be 
balanced to prevent down stream effects. 

Fifth option shown in Figure 1 d) presents a placed HEPA filtered negative air machine in vestibule, 
the duct through vestibule to corridor and keep door to vestibule closed but door to patient room open.  

Sixth option shown in Figure 1 e) shows a HEPA unit recirculating air in room after scrubbing. Not 
negative, supply should be covered to prevent high pressure. 

All these options consider that returns should be covered (except Option 1) and a distance of 8 meters 
from final discharge point to opening into building. 

Decontamination Unit: Compact decontamination units as shown in Figure 2 can be installed in the 
room or outside, capturing the air and exhausting it to the outside. Exhaustion must be considered in places 
with risk of contamination; such as rooms for patients with infectious diseases. 

Research has demonstrated that appropriate air filtration limits the pass-through of virus particles, 
which frequently hitch a ride on larger particles, into downstream areas. Properly installed higher efficiency 
filters can remove particles of a relevant size depending on their installed capture efficiency. The National Air 
Filtration Association (NAFA) described some benefit that can be reasonably inferred for appropriately sized 
(e.g., their removal rate is appropriate for the room), maintained, and operated portable (HEPA) filters [19]. 
A study conducted by the National Air Duct Cleaners Association (NADCA) recommended that an HVAC 
system should be inspected at a minimum, twice a year [20]. 

Elias et al [21] showed that in hospitals that contain HEPA filtration,  localized filtering in high-traffic 
spaces may further decrease the number of viral particles. A low-cost air purifier containing a HEPA filter can 
cost aorund $100 and renovate the air in a 15m2 room 5 times per hour and could be deployed widely in 
hospital environments. It may be worth taking any measures possible to increase airflow speed in existing 
HVAC systems, and to avoid recirculating air between rooms. 

The Federation of European Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning Associations (REHVA), has 
provided interim guidance on the operation and use of building services in areas with a coronavirus disease 
(COVID-19) outbreak. The guidance aims to prevent the spread of coronavirus through HVAC or plumbing 
systems [22]. 

According to ASHRAE, REHVA and NAFA, some strategies and guidelines that can applied to reduce 
the contamination in the ICU and in the hospitals are shown in Figure 3 and described in detail: 

Special ultraviolet (UV) cleaning equipment for supply-air or room-air treatment is effective at killing 
bacteria and viruses, but the guidance document states this equipment is only suitable for healthcare 
facilities. 

NAFA recommends a properly designed and maintained UV system, often combined with filtration, 
humidity control, and airflow management, to reduce infections from other viruses. The UV-C light is absorbed 
by Ribonucleic acid (RNA) and Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) in cells and microbes inducing changes 
(apoptosis) in the DNA/RNA structures that result in their inability to replicate. Many microbes are susceptible 
to inactivation using UV-C light, including bacteria, viruses, fungi, and spores. The amount of inactivation is 
directly proportional to the UV-C dose, which is received, and this in turn is the result of its intensity and 
exposure time [23, 24]. 

UV-C radiation has a short wavelength and high energy, compared to other UV radiation, which enables 
it to function the best in a direct line and at a short distance. Due to the high energy of the UV-C radiation, it 
is bound to the inverse square law where the propagation of light intensity decreases exponentially with 
increasing distance from the light source. Studies developed by Escombe et al. [24] and Casanova et al. [25] 
provided that there is a sufficient circulation inside the room to mix the air, upper-room UV fixtures have 
shown to be an effective asset for use in infection control in high-risk clinical settings. 

According to Ryan et al. [26], lamps with germicidal ultraviolet irradiation (eUVGI) decreased the 
proliferation of microbes in HVAC systems. The study was carried out in neonatal intensive care units, and 
in the ventilation systems of air conditioning units. The result obtained through the research showed that the 
patients suffered a drop in microbial colonization in the trachea and also had a decrease in the use of 
antibiotics. The proliferation of multiple bacteria, fungi and microphones were included among the HVAC 
systems, ICU environment and patients, thus allowing to generate more tests of the results obtained by the 
application of UV radiation. 

In addition to UVC, there are other methods that can be used for that objective, such as the use of 
Ozone (O3) and the Advanced Oxidation processes. The first, stands out for its high oxidative capacity (2.07 
mV), making it an excellent sanitizer capable of inactivating several pathogenic microorganisms [27, 28, 29]. 
However, both the World Health Organization (WHO) and the Brazilian National Environment Council 
(Conselho Nacional do Meio Ambiente - CONAMA) regulate the maximum concentrations of this molecule, 
because when at high levels, it is associated with several respiratory problems [30, 31]. As for the Advanced 
Oxidation processes, also called Active Oxidation, the PHI (Photo Hydro Ionization) cells must be highlighted. 
Its operation occurs through high intensity UV lamps directed and positioned inside the equipment or in the 
insufflation ducts. This luminous medium when in contact with a specific metallic mesh results in the formation 
of Hydrogen Peroxides (H2O2), hydroxides, superoxide ions and ozone ions in low concentration [32, 33]. 
Thus, these chemical by-products interact with the microorganisms present in the air and on the surface, 
inactivating them and purifying the environment [34]. Therefore, both processes are efficient in fighting 
pathogens. 

Hospital administrators, governments, and policy makers must work with ICU practitioners to prepare 
for a substantial increase in critical care room capacity. 

Use more window-driven natural ventilation in buildings without mechanical ventilation. The use of 
openable windows is recommended, even if this causes thermal discomfort. Even in buildings with 
mechanical ventilation, open windows can be used to boost ventilation. 

Open windows in toilets with passive stack or mechanical exhaust systems may cause contaminated 
airflow from the toilet to other rooms. So, in these circumstances, it is recommended that toilet windows 
remain shut. If there is no adequate exhaust ventilation from toilets, and window airflow cannot be avoided, 
keep windows open in other spaces to achieve cross flows through buildings. 

REHVA showed that flushing toilets creates plumes containing droplets, as well as droplet residue 
when toilets are flushed with open lids. SARS-CoV-2 viruses have been detected in stool samples (reported 
in recent scientific papers and by the Chinese authorities). Exhaust ventilation systems of toilets should 
always be kept continuously. Make sure that under pressure is created, especially to avoid the fecal-oral 
transmission; as shown in Figure. 

Transmission of some viruses in buildings can be limited by changing air temperature and humidity 
levels. In isolation rooms, the vents are located at the bottom, and airflow is tightly controlled, so air is 
prevented from "spilling over" into other spaces. It has been found that when it comes to air-conditioned 
rooms, low values of humidity and temperature can allow respiratory illnesses such as COVID-19 to continue 
to survive. Such small virus particles stay airborne and can travel long distances carried by airflows in the 
rooms or in the bathrooms.  For example, high-risk immunocompromised patients are often kept within 
Protective Environment (PE) rooms, designed to limit outside airborne infectious agents from entering into 
the room. To do this, these rooms are positively pressurized, relative to the corridor space, with a minimum 
of HEPA supply air [18]. However, this pressurization differential also increases the likelihood that aerosols 
in the patient room will migrate outside of the PE room and into the higher traffic corridor space when the 
door is open. While PE rooms typically function as intended for the occupant, if an immunocompromised 
patient is also under treatment for an airborne infectious disease, the process of limiting pathogen ingress 
into the room could potentially create involuntary exposure to health care workers, other patients, and visitors 
via the corridor space. In comparison, Airborne Infection Isolation (AII) rooms utilize a negative pressure 
differential relative to the corridor space and adjacent rooms, directly exhausting room air to the exterior of 
the building to contain aerosolized pathogens from spreading into circulation and shared spaces. The same 
negative pressure that aids in preventing spread of aerosolized pathogens from inside the room, can 
involuntarily expose the room occupants to airborne pathogens that are sourced from occupants of the 
corridor space. Both PE and AII rooms may be designed with an anteroom that is used as an additional buffer 
between common areas and protected spaces to prevent pathogen spread and provide a location for hospital 
staff to apply and remove personal protection equipment (PPE). Although contact with contaminated surfaces 
or people is the biggest source of infection, the aerosol is also a source of contamination where masks may 
not be sufficient to eliminate contamination. In addition, toilets during flushing can also be a contamination 
source, therefore, REHVA states that 2 meters away and wearing masks is not enough to protect from 
infection of Corona Virus SARS-CoV-2. That actions, such as increasing ventilation, is useful to remove 
additional particles [14].  

COVID-19 is resistant to environmental changes and is susceptible only to a very high relative humidity 
(RH), above 80%, and a temperature above 30°C, which is not acceptable in terms of thermal comfort. 

Humidification is suggested in winter (up to a level of 30%) because nasal systems and mucous 
membranes are more susceptible to infections at very low relative humidity (RH) of 10-20%. However, from 
March, climatic conditions start to have a RH higher than 30% in all European climates, without humidification. 

Figure 5 shows that a dry room air (20ºC, 20% RH) and in humid room of 80% RH, most coronaviruses 
stay viable for 2 days (blue line; blue star). In room with air of 50% RH, less than 1% of viruses are viable 
after 2 days (red star) [25]. 

Low temperature increases the persistence of viable viruses on inanimate surfaces (in the study 
stainless steel, black line), high temperatures decrease the persistence of coronaviruses (yellow line). 

At all temperatures (4ºC, 20ºC, 40ºC), the inactivation rate is fastest in intermediate humidity of 50% 
RH. 

Taylor et al [35] correlated mid-range humidity levels with improved mammalian immunity against 
respiratory infections. Mousavi et al [36] reported that RH values between 40% and 60% are most 
unfavorable climatic conditions for microorganisms’ survival. A proper selection, operation, and maintenance 
of humidification equipment is required when water vapor is introducted in the indoor environment to achieve 
the mid-range humidity levels associated with decreased infections. Using the SARS study as a basis, the 
relationship between relative humidity and virus activation is understandable [35, 36]. 

Casanova et al. [25] studied the effects of air temperature and humidity on two surrogates of SARS-
CoV, namely transmissible gastroenteritis virus (TGEV) and mouse hepatitis virus (MHV). These viruses 
could serve as conservative substitutes of SARS-CoV and other coronaviruses for modeling exposure, risk 
of transmission and control measures for human pathogenic viruses in health care surfaces . 

According to REHVA [14] and ASHRAE guidelines, a schematic shown in Figure 6 was developed to 
show how aerosols behave and possible solutions to fight it. 

The ICU community must be prepared for the challenges associated with this pandemic. Streamlining 
of workflows for rapid diagnosis and isolation, clinical management, and infection prevention will matter not 
only to patients with COVID-19, but also to health-care workers and other patients who are at risk from 
nosocomial transmission [38]. 

The role of healthcare workers (HCW) in the transmission of pathogens from patient-to-patient is well 
documented. However, increasing evidence reports the contaminated environment as highly significant in 
pathogen transmission. A number of factors, including temperature, humidity and severity could influence the 
concentration of viral particles in an aerosol sample [38]. 

The Food and Drug Administration of the United States of America (FDA) defines a N95 respirator 
mask as a respiratory protective device designed to achieve a very close facial fit and very efficient filtration 
of airborne particles. In addition to blocking splashes, sprays and large droplets, the respirator is also 
designed to prevent the wearer from breathing in very small particles that may be in the air. While the ultimate 
effectiveness of these respirator masks is debated, respirator masks are believed to be the best currently 
available method of protecting against inhalation of highly infectious airborne particles.  

Poorly ventilated buildings affect air quality and can contribute to the spread of the disease, as 
microorganisms, can be transmitted by air-conditioning systems. In health facilities where there is a high 
concentration of infectious patients, evidence shows that poorly ventilated buildings have higher risks of 
infectious disease transmission for patients, workers, and visitors. Li et al [38] demonstrated the association 
between ventilation and air movements in buildings, and the transmission/spread of infectious diseases. 

Although there is insufficient data to specify and quantify the minimum ventilation requirements particularly 
in hospitals and isolation rooms in relation to spread of infectious diseases via the airborne route, that study 
supports the use of negatively pressurized isolation rooms in hospitals for patients with these diseases. 

We all have a role to play to control the spread of this disease. HVAC is part of it and even more 
significant are social distancing, hygiene and the influence we can have on personal behavior. Ryan et al. 
[26] showed that the eUVGI decreased HVAC microbial colonization and it was associated with reduced 
neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) environment and tracheal microbial colonization [20, 26]. 

ASHRAE 55 defines the standards of comfort parameters, the PMV (Predicted Mean Vote) index takes 
into account the relative humidity, although at a small extend. Thus, the statement that rises from this 
spreading of viruses, is that air conditioning should no longer be thought for comfort of human, but for comfort 
for the human, that is, the relative humidity must have a weight as important as the operating temperature. 
Rethinking a higher air speed even in buildings whose objective is only human comfort, mainly with the return 
of the air down, can help to change the trajectory of the virus and inject the same in return grids with UV-C 
lamps [39]. 

Even Datacenter rooms are already accepting adiabatic systems much of the time, achieving energy 
savings by the use of indexes like EUED (Energy Usage Effectiveness Design) and TWI (Total Water Impact), 
where the slightly higher humidity (45%-65%) can facilitate the use of an adiabatic system, in addition to 
allowing higher temperatures for the entry of chilled water into air conditioners, generating better compression 
ratios and energy savings [40-41]. 

Furthermore, future designs should reconsider the best way to triage and complete initial assessment 
of patients that present symptoms related to airborne viruses to minimize exposure to areas with other patient 
types if possible. In planning for the future, architects, designers, building operators, and health care 
administrators should aspire for hospital designs that can accommodate periods of enhanced social 
distancing and minimize connections and flow between common areas, while also affording flexibility for 
efficient use of space during normal operating conditions. 

The role of infection control in the design of hospitals is increasing every day. HVAC systems play an 
increasingly important role to minimize the risk of infection from airborne transmission within the built 
environment. 

Four strategies were set to change the concept of contaminant air conditioning (due to small droplets 
passing through the coil, and with the high-speed pressure ventilation being distributed to the occupants) to 
the concept of an important tool for the inactivation of viruses in the room. 

These strategies (see Figure 4): 1) UVC lamps, 2) Pressure control and air renewal/filtration, 3) 
Restroom actions, 4) Humidity Control to prevent contagion were evaluated in terms of the contagion sources. 

In addition, a holistic view of the human comfort was suggested, requiring rethink the PMV index, as 
humidity has smaller impact on human comfort than on health issue. 
