Peru is one of the most biodiverse countries in the world. Genetic diversity is an important 
component of biodiversity, and it is crucial for current efforts to protect and sustainably 
manage several organisms and habitats. As far as we know, there is only one work 
describing Peruvian genetic information stored in public databases. We aimed to update this 
previous work searching in four public databases that stored sequencing information: 
Nucleotide, BioProject, PATRIC), BOLD. With this information we comment on the 
contribution of Peruvian institutions during recent years. In Nucleotide, the largest database, 
Bacteria are the most sequenced organisms by Peruvian institutions (70.60%), pathogenic 
bacteria such as Pasteurella multocida, Neisseria meningitidis, and Vibrio parahaemolyticus 
were the most abundant. We found no sequence records from the Archaea domain. In 
BioProject, the most common sequence belongs to Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica 
serovar Infantis. In PATRIC, a database for pathogenic agents, Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
and Yersinia pestis had the highest number of entries. Finally, in BOLD, exclusively 
Eukaryotic database, Chordata (Aves and Actinopterygii), Angiospermae, and Arthropoda 
(Insecta, and Arachnida) were the most frequent records. Our results would indicate 
research preferences of Peruvian institutions, focusing on infectious diseases. Although 
there has been a significant increase of DNA information submitted by Peruvian institutions 
since the last report, the genetic diversity reflected in these databases remains inconsistent 
with the diversity in the country. More efforts must be made to know obtain genetic 
information from more underestimated taxonomic groups and to promote more genetic 
research in regional Peruvian institutions. 

Peru is one of the most biodiverse countries in the world. Current estimates of species 
richness showed the occurrence of numerous species, such as plants (20 533), vertebrates 
(5 738), and arthropods (30 547) (MINAM, 2019). There are no current records of the extant 
Peruvian diversity of bacteria or archaea, though. Conservation and management of this 
vast biodiversity requires different approaches considering ecological and systematic 
knowledge, and, recently, information about genetic diversity (Norena et al. 2018). This 
information is essential not only for conservation and taxonomic studies but also for 
bioprospecting novel compounds (Sekurova et al 2019) or for breeding programs assisted by 
genetic markers (Assefa et al. 2019, Mrode 2019). 

Bioinformatics, the discipline that uses computational approaches to answer biological 
questions, has become essential to analyze genetic and genomic information (Baxevanis 
and Ouellette 2005). Especially, to study large and complex DNA datasets obtained via next-
generation sequencing (NGS), to discover new genes, functions, pathways, and molecular 
interactions. Most of this information is available in online public databases. For instance, 
GenBank (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank), at the National Center for Biotechnology 
Information from the US National Institute of Health, currently possess 216,531,829 
sequences, being one of the largest source worldwide. Other databases such as the 
Barcode of Life Data System (https://www.boldsystems.org), 2,869,168 sequences, are 
more specific, providing information from specific eukaryotic genes. 

The representativeness of Latin American data in genome projects and public databases 
has been discussed since the beginning of the genomic era (Ramírez et al. 2002). The 
information stored in databases has become essential to study the genetic diversity of 
indigenous peoples (Harris et al. 2018), human diseases (Norris et al. 2018), and regional 
biotechnological and agro-industrial challenges (Sasson & Malpica 2018, Wang et al. 2017).  

The most recent assessment of the Peruvian genetic data in public databases was done by 
Norena et al. (2018). The authors estimated 645 753 sequences in the NCBI Nucleotide 
database associated with the term “Peru”, from which 6 522 (1.01%) were published by 
national institutions. We updated the amount of sequencing data of the Peruvian biodiversity 
submitted by national institutions to four main public genetic databases: NCBI BioProject, a 
database that comprises multiple collections of biological data related to a single genomic 
sequencing initiative. NCBI Nucleotide that comprises GenBank and related databases. The 
exclusively bacterial database Pathosystems Resource Integration Center (PATRIC) which 
provides sequencing, protein-protein interactions and transcriptomic data (Wattam et al. 
2017), and the Barcode of Life Data System (Ratnasingham & Hebert, 2007),  a DNA 
barcode database, focused in single markers, namely, the cytochrome oxidase I (COI) gene 
for animals, internal transcribed spacers (ITS) for fungi, and the ribulose-bisphosphate 
carboxylase (rbcL) and maturase K (matK) for plants. The same databases were used by 
Norena et al. (2018). 

Nucleotide data was retrieved using Entrez Direct (Kans 2013). In April 2020, we 
downloaded all the records from the Nucleotide database containing the query "Peru" using 
the following command, <esearch -db nucleotide -query "Peru" | efetch -format gb > 
peru.gb>. The output of this search, a 30 Gb file in genbank format, was used to extract 
information such as the journal and organism of the published sequence. In Nucleotide, 
information of the institution that submitted the genetic sequence is stored in the “journal” 
variable. A file containing only unique journal names was also created to count all Peruvian 
institutions in the database. Through awk scripts, we counted how many times the word 
"Peru" appeared in the variable journal, how many times a certain institution uploaded 
sequences to this database, and how many organisms have been sequenced. We also 
analyzed which organisms were the most sequenced by each institution in Peru. 

BioProject data was also retrieved using Entrez Direct and the command 
<esearch -db BioProject -query "Peru" | efetch -format xml | xtract -pattern 
DocumentSummary -element Project \ -block Organism -element OrganismName 
Supergroup \ -block Submission -element Name > BioProject.xml>, and processed 
using awk scripts. Both, BOLD and PATRIC data were retrieved directly from their 
webpages, using “Peru” as a search query. This data was downloaded in tabular (tsv) and 
comma-separated (csv) formats, respectively. For both datasets, cat and grep scripts were 
used. cat concatenates texts to create a new output, and grep -c, counts the occurrences of 
a certain word query. awk scripts were additionally used for the BOLD dataset to group and 
count most sequenced taxonomic orders per institution. For the PATRIC dataset, csvgrep 
was used to count sequenced organisms per institution. All code and scripts are available in 
this GitHub repository: https://github.com/reymonera/mining_peru_sequence_DB. Finally, we 
searched in the Scopus reference database (https://www.scopus.com) for records with the 
term “genetic diversity” produced by at least one Peruvian institution. 

Our results are summarized in Figure 1 and Table 1. In addition, complete information of the 
records from each database described here can be found in the Supplementary Information 
associated with this publication (Romero & Castillo, 2020). We found 817 694 records 
associated with the term “Peru'' in the Nucleotide database (Table 1). However, this number 
could be an overestimate of Peruvian sequences in this database. For instance, we found 
some records that corresponded to the Spanish institution Estacion Biológica de Donana, 
because the building where it is located is named “Pabellon del Peru”. Thus, to be consistent 
with the previous report from Norena et al. (2018), we only focused on submissions by 
Peruvian institutions. Therefore, we found 14 488 sequences (1.77% of the records related 
to the term “Peru”) submitted by 36 Peruvian institutions (Suppl. Inf. 2). 11 institutions 
submitted more than 100 records to this database (Fig. 1). Public institutions such as 
Instituto Nacional de Salud (INS), Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos (UNMSM), 
Instituto Nacional de Investigación Agraria (INIA), and Instituto de Investigaciones de la 
Amazonía Peruana (IIAP), and private institutions such as Universidad Peruana Cayetano 
Heredia (UPCH) and Farmacéuticos Veterinarios S. A. C. (FARVET) submitted most of the 
records. In BioProject, we found 193 records related to the term “Peru” (Suppl. Inf. 3), 59 of 
them were submitted by 9 Peruvian institutions (Fig. 1). INS has most of the records, 
followed by UNMSM, Universidad Nacional Agraria La Molina (UNALM) and UPCH. In 
PATRIC, we found 2 959 records (Suppl. Inf. 4), 107 of them submitted by 8 Peruvian 
institutions (Fig. 1). Similarly, most of the records were submitted by UPCH, INS, and 
UNMSM. Finally, in BOLD, we found 23 968 public records associated to the term “Peru”. 
From these, 8 249 were mined from Genbank so to avoid counting them twice, we discarded 
them in the final count. We found that 3 754 records were submitted by 11 Peruvian 
institutions (Suppl. Inf. 5). Most of the sequences were produced by the Centro de 
Ornitología y Biodiversidad (CORBIDI), UNMSM (mainly, from the Museo de Historia 
Natural), UNALM (mainly, from the Herbarium), the Instituto del Mar del Perú (IMARPE), and 
the Servicio Nacional de Sanidad Agraria del Perú (SENASA). 

Records from the Nucleotide, BioProject and PATRIC databases are biased to pathogens 
probably reflecting the research field of groups that frequently submit DNA data and the 
direction of research funding. In the Nucleotide database, most records belong to 
Pasteurella multocida, and Neisseria meningitidis, followed by Vibrio parahaemolyticus, 
Bacillus thuringiensis, Escherichia coli, Shewanella sp., Aeromonas veronii, Homo sapiens, 
HIV, and Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Figure 2). 70.60% of the records belonged to 
Bacteria. 24.38%, to Eukaryota and 3.07%, to Viruses (Suppl. Inf. 2). In addition, we found 
no records of Archaea submitted by Peruvian institutions. Within Eukaryota, most of the 
records belonged to clades Fungi and Viridiplantae and Phyla Chordata, Arthropoda, and 
Mollusca (Suppl. Inf. 2). In BioProject, Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Infantis is 
the most frequent record (Suppl. Inf. 3). PATRIC’s most frequent records are pathogenic 
bacteria, namely, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Yersinia pestis, Shigella sonnei, and 
Staphylococcus aureus (Suppl. Inf. 4). BOLD presents different results because it is a 
Eukaryotic database. BOLD’s most frequent taxa are, in descending order, Chordata (Aves 
and Actinopterygii), Angiospermae, and Arthropoda (Insecta, and Arachnida) (Suppl. Inf. 5). 

We found 266 articles published from authors affiliated to at least one Peruvian institution 
(Figure 3, Suppl. Inf. 6). Results were similar to the previous ones: UPCH, UNMSM, 
UNALM, and INS appeared in most of the results. Research groups collaborated mainly with 
institutions from the United States, Brazil, United Kingdom, Colombia, and France. Main 
subject areas in these investigations are Agricultural and Biological Sciences, (Bio)Medicine 
and Environmental Sciences (Suppl. Inf. 7). 

It has been two years since Norena et al. (2018) reported the first results of Latin American 
genetic data stored in public databases. These authors kindly shared their scripts and 
information with us to reproduce and compare results. In our view, open science and data 
must be promoted, thus, all our scripts and results can be freely accessed and downloaded 
from GitHub. Norena et al. reported 1.01% (~6 500) of records deposited by Peruvian 
institutions in NCBI Nucleotide. We showed an increase of more than two times (14 488) in 
records in only two years (Table 1). Although, our calculated occurrence (1.71%) did not 
change a lot because the permanent increase of Nucleotide total records. An independent 
report by Clark et al. (2016) compared Genbank information between a similar range of time 
(2014-2016) and found two to four-fold increases in both invertebrate and vertebrate data. In 
the case of Peru, INS and UNMSM have generated more data than all other institutions 
together (> 8 000 records). In BioProject we found 30.05% records submitted by Peruvian 
institutions (58 out of 193) doubling the occurrences found by Norena et al. (15.95%). In 
PATRIC, Norena et al. found 0.28% records submitted by Peruvian institutions while we 
found 3.62% records (107 out of 2959). Finally, in BOLD, we reported 3 754 records while 
Norena et al. found 3 438. In the latter case, the increase was smaller than in the other 
databases. 

It is not a surprise that the same institutions are actively submitting data to different 
databases because they host strong research groups related to emerging and infectious 
diseases, biodiversity, and biotechnology. However, most of them are based in Lima, Peru’s 
capital. We believe that, to increase diversity and representativeness, funding efforts should 
be directed to more regional research groups and other highly diverse taxa, for instance, 
non-pathogenic bacteria, archaea, non-vertebrates and non-flowering plants.  

We are aware of the limitations of our searches. We limited the search to the four databases 
mentioned above for consistency and reproducibility. We also limited the search to 
nucleotide sequences. Further information of protein sequences and structures can be found 
in the databases NCBI Protein and Protein Data Bank (Berman et al. 2000). Also, as we 
consider only Peruvian institutions, we did not mention international institutions based in 
Peru, for example, the Centro Internacional de la Papa (CIP) or the US Naval Medical 
Research Unit Six (NAMRU-6) that also produced sequences from Peruvian organisms. 
However, as both institutions are based in Lima, their inclusion did not change the main 
conclusions of our analysis (see Suppl. Inf. 2, 3, 4, 5). Furthermore, we relied on the 
information provided by the researchers which could result in heterogeneous data even if it 
comes from the same institution, for instance, in BioProject, we found records from INS, with 
different  names such as “Peruvian National Institute of Health”, “Instituto Nacional de Salud 
- Peru” , “Instituto Nacional de Salud” (Suppl. Inf. 3). Thus, we believe that each institution 
must develop an homogenous protocol for data submission. 

Sequencing projects will definitely rise in the next months and years. It would not be a 
surprise, for instance, to see a rise of SARS-CoV2 genomes submitted by Peruvian 
institutions. In order to effectively track this information and keep it updated we encourage 
Peruvian institutions to create a unified online platform to frequently survey and organize 
sequencing data.  

We agree with several members of the scientific community that in order to improve the 
quality of science: transparency, reproducibility, efficiency, and benefits to society, there is a 
need for open data (Molloy, 2013). Public databases play a big role in open science and 
reproducibility. Thus, the availability of sequencing data in this platform is crucial for scientific 
research and should be practiced and encouraged. In addition, we believe in the necessity of 
a national genome sequencing plan developed by public and private research institutions. 
This will increase the Peruvian genetic information in public databases, articulate efforts and 
promote networking from different institutions, and provide resources to manage several 
issues from several topics such as agriculture, public health and biodiversity conservation. 
Finally, efforts should be also focused on a country-wide capacity building initiative to train a 
new generation of Peruvian bioinformaticians that will be essential in future challenges to our 
biodiversity. 

We thank Marco Cristancho (Universidad de Los Andes) and Andrea Gonzalez (Centro de 
Bioinformática y Biología Computacional de Colombia – BIOS) for kindly sharing the raw 
data and scripts from Norena et al. (2018). PER thanks to Cath Brooksbank and Piraveen 
Gopalasingam, both from EMBL, and members of the CABANA initiative for their effort to 
strengthen bioinformatics capacities in Latin America. CCV thanks Pablo Tsukayama 
(UPCH) for providing access to computing facilities. 
