Since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, scientists and health care workers 
provided information based on scientific evidence for the general public, 
increasing their exposure on social and mainstream media. Society witnessed 
science-in-the-making while scientists and health care workers were dedicated to 
improve understanding and develop tools for the diagnosis, treatment, prevention 
and control of this novel disease. This study aims to assess the impact of the 
ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on adolescents’ perception of science, scientists 
and health care workers; to understand whether it changed their career choices; 
and to learn about the resulting first-year applications and enrollments in 
scientific and medical careers for the 2020-2021 school year in Mexico. We 
conducted a voluntary national anonymous online survey and analyzed the 
official database of the National Association of Universities and Higher Education 
Institutions in Mexico (ANUIES) to answer these questions. With 983 valid 
responses (CI 95%) we found that by mid-2021, 9 out of 10 respondents aged 
14-19 in Mexico had a positive perception of science; that the ongoing pandemic 
improved their perception of science (69%), scientists (70%) and health care 
workers (72%); and that their experience during the pandemic changed their 
career choices to pursue science (23%) and health care (28%) careers. The 
selected main reason (40-50%) for studying science and health care careers was 
“liking that type of knowledge”; while only 3% agreed that the pandemic was the 
main reason for their choice. A thorough analysis of the official ANUIES database 
showed an increase in first-year applications for scientific (22%) and health care 
(17%) careers for the 2020-2021 school year compared to the previous, non-
pandemic 2019-2020 school year. Enrollment was partly limited by the number of 
places available. With this study we conclude that a silver lining of the COVID-19 
pandemic could be the improvement of the perception of science, scientists and 
health care workers and possibly, the creation of a new generation of scientists, 
medical doctors, and health care workers. Future studies would need to 
investigate the duration and further positive consequences of this pandemic 
effect and to understand whether these results are consistent in other parts of the 
world where adolescents experienced different public policies, public messages 
and COVID-19 outcomes.  

Most Mexican adolescents in our study have a positive perception of science. By 
mid-2021, their experience during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic significantly 
improved their perception of science, scientists and health care workers, 
increased their interests in these careers and inspired some of them in pursuing 
careers both in science and health care.  

The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic required individuals to look for information to 
increase their safety, and to use terms previously only common in academic 
contexts and used by audiences interested in science and medicine. Since the 
beginning of the pandemic, platforms like Google reported an increase in the 
search tendency of words related to the detection, symptoms, transmission, 
treatment and prevention of COVID-19 (1). Social media platforms like Twitter 
reported having “coronavirus”, “covid”, and “pandemic” as trending topics, while 
“quarantine” was mentioned 1.6 million times in 2020. Experts, both form 
scientific and medical fields used social media platforms to share technical 
information in real time with peers while also informing the general public (2,3). 
Few worldwide events in modern history have put science and health sciences 
on center stage as much as the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, which by 
December 2021 had over 5 million confirmed deaths around the globe (4,5). 

Mainstream media, decision makers and the general public increased their 
interest towards science understanding and engagement to take better decisions 
and lower the risk of COVID-19 transmission. Since the beginning of the 
pandemic, society showed great admiration and gratitude to both health care 
personnel and the scientific community for their dedicated work in managing and 
solving this health crisis (6). Life-transforming events such as a pandemic can 
dramatically impact young adults’ attitudes (7). The 1969 arrival of mankind to the 
Moon inspired a generation of youngsters to pursue careers in science (4). Since 
the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, many countries and organizations have 
reported an increase in public confidence and interest towards science and an 
increase in applications for scientific and medical studies, an effect popularized 
as the “Fauci effect”(8, 9, 10, 11, 12).  

We conducted this study to understand if the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic 
changed the perception that adolescents in Mexico had for science, scientists 
and health care workers, if it inspired them to change their career choices and if 
there was an increase in first year college applications and enrollment in Mexican 
Universities on scientific and health care careers. 

To understand the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic in the perception 
of science, scientists, health care workers, and career decisions of individuals 14 
to 19 years of age. 
 
We assessed four topics: 

1. Science and Health care perception: appraisal of science, scientists and 
health care workers 

2. Mexican adolescents’ professional interest to study scientific and health 
care careers (medicine, nursing, public health, clinical psychology, 
chemistry, biology) 

3. Application to scientific and health care university careers 

4. Enrollment to first year in scientific and health care careers. 

To address topics 1 and 2 (view, change on perception and interest on science, 
scientists and health professionals), we applied an anonymous quantitative 
multiple-choice on-line survey in Spanish to a voluntary national corpus of 14 to 
19 year olds with Internet access in Mexico, between May 5 and June 27, 2021. 

The survey was conducted following the code of ethics and practices established 
by the American Association of Public Opinion Research (AAPOR) for honesty, 
respect and integrity. 

To address topics 3 and 4 (application and enrollment into first year of university 
for scientific and health care careers), we analyzed the official yearly reports of 
the National Association of Universities and Higher Education Institutions in 
Mexico (ANUIES) (13).  

Univariable and multivariable statistical analysis was performed. 

The resulting cohort included 983 adolescents (63.5% women) of 14 to 19 years 
of age (mean 16.7, 66% 16-18) from all different states in Mexico distributed in a 
non-representative way according to their population, of whom 971 (98.8%) were 
in school (69.8% in public schools), most in their last years of high school (77%) 
and 48% reported that none of their parents underwent university studies. (Fig.1) 

Respondents had to choose one of the eight enlisted words that best described 
their personal view of science: four positive words (knowledge, progress, 
solutions, well-being) and four negative words (pollution, dehumanization, 
incomprehensive, risks). (Fig. 2) 

Most (91.4%) respondents selected a positive word to describe their perception 
of science, being “knowledge” (44.0%) the most popular, followed by “progress” 
(28.7%). A more positive view of science was held by men (94.2%), those in 
private schools (94.5%), those enrolled in high school (92.0%) and those with at 
least one university-educated parent (92.8%). 

Those who had a negative perception of science (8.6%) selected “pollution” 
(3.8%) as the most frequent word, and mostly they were those not studying 
(25.0%), or studying in public schools (9.7%), women (10.3%) and those who did 
not have any university-educated parent (10.2%). 

69.1% of respondents said that their perception of science improved as a 
result of the pandemic, 23.1% reported that it remained the same and 7.8% 
said that the pandemic worsened their view of science. These proportions are 
similar for both adolescents that reported a good and a bad perception of science 
in subtopic 1.1 (Fig. 3.a). 

70.4% of respondents said that their perception of scientists improved as a 
result of the pandemic, 25.9% reported that it remained the same and 3.7% 
said that the pandemic worsened their view of scientists. (Fig. 3.b) 

When instructed to choose the best reason, out of four options to explain these 
changes, 53% of those whose opinion of scientists improved selected “because 
they are people who provide great discoveries to society” as the main reason, 
and 43% of those whose opinion of scientists worsened selected “other”, and in 
second place (33%) “they only discover things and develop products to earn 
money”. 

71.9% of respondents said that their perception of health care workers 
improved as a result of the pandemic, 24.6% reported that it remained the 
same and 3.5% said that the pandemic worsened their view of health care 
workers. (Fig. 3.c) 

When instructed to choose the best reason, out of four options to explain these 
changes, 28% of those whose opinion of health care workers improved selected 
“they are intelligent people that studied a lot” as the main reason and (26%) “they 
avoid suffering and save lives” as their second option. 35% of those whose 
opinion worsened selected “other” as their main option and (24%) “they are 
arrogant” in second place.  

433 adolescents (44% of respondents) reported that their study intentions 
changed: half (22.1%) stated that their study intentions changed as a result 
of the pandemic, while the other half (22.6%) changed their study plans for 
“other reasons”, 56% of adolescents will continue with their same pre-pandemic 
study plans. 

Those who reported a change in interests as a result of the pandemic were more 
female (23%) than men (20%), more studying in public schools (25%) than in 
private schools (17%), and those whose neither parents studied in universities 
(25.7%) than those whose both parents studied (17.2%). Two respondents (18%) 
out of the 11 adolescents (1.1% of N=983) that will not study a career stated that 
they changed their study intentions as a result of the pandemic. 

When analyzing the responses of those who changed their career plans as a 
result of the pandemic according to area of knowledge we found that 23% of the 
adolescents who want to study science (natural sciences, math and statistics) 
(6.2% of the total), 28% of the adolescents that want to study health care 
(22.2% of the total), and 20.0% of the adolescents who want to study careers 
unrelated to natural sciences or health sciences (71.6% of the total) changed 
their study intentions as a result of the ongoing pandemic. (Fig. 4 a. b.) 

More respondents in the cohort interested in a health career (28%), followed by 
science (23%) changed their career plans as a result of their experience during 
the pandemic, compared to respondents studying other careers (20%) or not 
planning to study at all (18%). 

Of those adolescents who changed their study intentions due to the pandemic to 
health sciences (28%), 26% also improved their perception of health care 
workers due to the pandemic (Subtopic 1.4). And of those adolescents who 
changed their study intentions to science (natural sciences, math and statistics) 
(23%) as a result of the pandemic, 15% also improved their perception of 
scientists (Subtopic 1.3). 

When asked the reason for wanting to study science (natural sciences, math, 
statistics) or health sciences, the main reason selected by those pursuing 
careers in these areas was “I like that type of knowledge” in 39.7% of those 
intending to study health sciences and in 48.4% of those wanting to pursue 
natural sciences, math and statistics. 3.2% of those wanting to study these 
careers reported that the ongoing pandemic had inspired them to do so. 

Analyzing the official ANUIES reports’ databases we found that overall 
applications rose by 6.5% from 2019-2020 to 2020-2021 school years (from 
2,053,348 to 2,186,739). During this period, there was a 21.5% increase in 
applications for natural sciences, math and statistics (from 67,649 to 82,214) and 
a 17.1% increase during the same period for health sciences (from 374,231 to 
438,284). In the first year of the pandemic the increase in first year 
applications for scientific (science and health care) fields were well above 
(21.5% and 17.1%) than the increase in other fields of study (6.5%). (Fig. 5.a) 

Analyzing the official ANUIES reports’ databases we found that first year 
enrollment for natural sciences, math and statistics in the 2020-2021 school year 
(32,095) was lower than the total number of applications received (82,214) but 
also lower than the available spots (45,608), resulting in a 70.4% coverage of the 
places offered. Similarly, the first year enrollment in health sciences for the 2020-
2021 school year (126,132) was lower than the total number of applications 
received (438,284) but also lower than the spots available (180,423) for entry, 
resulting in a 69.9% of coverage of places offered. The disparity between 
demand and supply, along with other variables, resulted in a 2020-2021 first year 
enrollment of 126,132 students for health sciences (a decrease of 6.1% from the 
previous school year) and 32,095 for natural sciences, math and statistics (an 
increase of 3.9% from the previous school year). Both the supply of places and 
the demand in applications have increased in these fields over time (2011-2021). 
(Fig. 5.b) 

As of mid-2021, almost all 14-19 year olds that responded the anonymous 
questionnaire had a favorable perception of science (91%) being “knowledge” the 
main word associated with it. Also, 7 out of 10 adolescents stated that their 
experience during the COVID-19 pandemic improved their opinion of science, 
scientists and health care workers while only 8% and 4% worsened their 
perception of science and of scientists and health care workers, respectively. It is 
interesting to note that more adolescents improved both their perception of 
scientists and health care workers as a result of the pandemic (58%) than those 
who worsened their perception of both professionals (1%). 

The COVID-19 pandemic had an impact on the study intentions in one fifth of the 
respondents (22%), being this impact higher in those interested in health care 
(28%) followed by those wanted to study a career in natural sciences, math and 
statistics (23%). Most of the adolescents who wanted to study health sciences 
and natural sciences stated that the reason for selecting these careers was “I like 
that type of knowledge” and only 3% of them reported that the pandemic inspired 
their choice. 

As a result of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, two out of ten adolescents that 
want to study a career in health sciences or natural sciences, math and statistics 
also improved their perception of health workers and scientists, respectively. 

For the first year of the pandemic (school year 2020-2021) there was an increase 
in applications for health sciences (17%) and natural sciences, math and 
statistics (22%) careers which represented a higher increase than seen for other 
fields of study (7%) from the previous, pre-pandemic school year 2019-2020. 
However, although applications were higher for this first year of the pandemic in 
both fields of study, the enrollment was limited in part by the availability of spots, 
resulting in a 6% decrease in first year health science students and a 4% 
increase in science careers. It is important to understand this disparity and the 
variables affecting this process. So far, there is a clear increase in demand in 
both fields, but interesting to note is the slight increase in science enrollment and 
the larger decrease in health enrollment.  

Future studies should investigate the duration and long-term consequences of 
the COVID-19 pandemic on both scientific and health care careers in order to 
assess the real impact of the so-called “Fauci effect”. 
Some studies had begun to emerge looking at the effects of the pandemic on 
perceptions of science, scientists and health care workers, as well as the impact 
on professional careers in other parts of the world. It will be of value to compare 
the results observed in this study with those conducted in different parts of the 
world, where adolescents experienced other public health policies, pandemic 
messages and COVID-19 outcomes. 

This apparent silver lining in the pandemic could possibly result in a new 
generation of scientists, physicians and health workers, and it could also be an 
opportunity for science communication professionals to enhance their 
engagement with the general public, for scientists to continue their approach to 
wider audiences, and for educators to promote science literacy and scientific 
thinking in students.  
