CONTEXT AND OBJECTIVE: Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has emerged in 
China in December 2019 and rapidly spread. Although extraordinary efforts have been 
made on research regarding pharmacological interventions, none have proven effective. 
This is the protocol for a rapid living systematic review that aims to compare the 
effectiveness and safety of different pharmacological interventions for the treatment of 
COVID-19. 

METHODS: rapid living systematic review methodology with Network Meta-
Analysis following the recommendations of Cochrane Handbook. We will include 
randomized controlled trials (RCT) and quasi-RCTs that evaluate single and/or combined 
pharmacological interventions at any dose for the treatment of COVID-19. We will search 
Medline via PubMed, Embase via Elsevier, Cochrane Library - Cochrane Central Register 
of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), Portal Regional BVS - LILACS, Scopus and 
WebofScience to identify potentially eligible studies. No language restrictions will be used 
in the selection. We will perform the critical appraisal of included studies with the Risk of 
Bias tool and the certainty of evidence will be evaluated using the Grading of 
Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE). 

Severe Acute Respiratory Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), a novel virus that causes 
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19), has emerged in China in December 2019 and on 
March 11th, 2020, a pandemic was already declared by the World Health Organization 
(1). As it has recently emerged, much still needs to be understood about this infection. 
Overall fatality rate, accuracy of diagnostic tests and effectiveness of current treatments 
are some of the most important and controversial topics.  

Fatality rate has varied substantially among countries and possible explanations are the 
accuracy of the tests and the difference between strategies used for SARS-CoV-2 testing. 
For example, in countries like Brazil, test availability is currently limited, and tests are 
prioritized for patients with more severe clinical symptoms who are suspected of having 
COVID-19 (2). On the other hand, countries such as the Republic of Korea have adopted 
a strategy of widely testing for SARS-CoV-2. As many patients with mild symptoms (which 
accounts for nearly 80% of SARS-CoV-2 infections) who would not be tested in Brazil 
were probably identified and included in the denominator in Korea, a much lower case-
fatality rate (1%) compared with Brazil (6.1%) is expected (3), and the actual overall 
mortality rate may be closer to Korea than Brazil estimations.  

Although mortality rate is concerning, the high transmissibility of the disease is much more 
alarming. Even if a low percentage of patients need hospitalization, the rapid spread of 
the disease and large number of people infected has overwhelmed the healthcare 
systems worldwide. To counteract the spread, severe social distancing measures—travel 
restrictions, closures of schools, and many businesses—are taking an unprecedented 
socioeconomic and psychological toll. Therefore, COVID-19 has caused an enormous 
impact on people’s quality of life and posed far-reaching threats, especially to the 
economy, health, and to the sustainability of healthcare systems (4).  

It is, therefore, urgent the need of finding effective interventions to avoid the progression 
of the disease and unburden the health care systems. Although extraordinary efforts have 
been made on research regarding pharmacological interventions, none have proven 
effective. Therefore, we aim to compare the effectiveness and safety of different 
pharmacological interventions for the treatment of COVID-19. This is the protocol for our 
rapid living systematic review. 

This rapid living systematic review and network meta-analysis (if applicable) protocol was 
prospectively registered in the PROSPERO ‘‘International Prospective Register of 
Systematic Reviews’’ platform (CRD42020179818), and was developed following the 
preferred reporting items for systematic review and meta-analysis protocols (PRISMA-P) 
guidance (5). The final report will comply with the recommendations of the PRISMA 
extension statement for reporting of systematic reviews incorporating network meta-
analyses (6). To conduct the rapid systematic review, we will employ abbreviated 
systematic review methods. Compared with the methods of a systematic review, we will 
not perform independent screens of abstracts and we will not search grey literature (7).  

We will perform a rapid living systematic review methodology with network meta-analysis 
following the recommendations proposed by the Cochrane Handbook (7). As this will be 
a living review, it will be continually updated. 

We will include randomized controlled trials (RCT) and quasi-RCTs that evaluate single 
and/or combined pharmacological interventions at any dose for the treatment of COVID-
19. 

We will include studies with patients with confirmed diagnosis of infection of SARS-CoV-
2. 

Any pharmacological intervention (used alone or combined with other interventions) for 
the treatment of COVID-19. 

Any other pharmacological interventions, placebo or standard treatment. 

Outcome measures 

- 
Primary outcomes 

● 
Mortality rate; 

● 
Length of hospital stay; 

● 
Adverse events; 
 
- 
Secondary outcomes 

● 
Time to clinical improvement;  

● 
Length of Intensive Care Unit stay;  

● 
Number of patients under invasive mechanical ventilation; 

● 
Time to viral clearance;  

We will include studies performed since November 2019. No language restrictions will be 
used in the selection.  

We will search Medline via PubMed, Embase via Elsevier, Cochrane Library - Cochrane 
Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), Portal Regional BVS - LILACS, Scopus 
and WebOfScience using relevant descriptors and synonyms, adapting the search to the 
specifications of each database to identify published, ongoing, and unpublished studies. 
We will also search the following COVID-19 specific databases: Epistemonikos COVID-
19 L·OVE platform; ClinicalTrials.gov; The World Health Organization International 
Clinical Trials Registry Platform (WHO ICTRP). Finally, we will use the technique of 
snowballing, searching the lists of references of the included studies. No language 
restrictions will be used in the selection. 

We will use the terms related to the problem of interest and the filter for randomized 
studies provided by Haynes et al. (8). The search strategy in MEDLINE via Pubmed is 
shown in Table 1. 

Based on pre-specified eligibility criteria, two authors will select the studies for inclusion 
in the review (ACPNP and APR). When two studies are found in more than one database 
(duplicated studies) we will consider only one of them for inclusion. If reports using the 
same participants and different outcome measurements or using different time points for 
the assessments are found, both reports will be included (the two reports will be 
considered as parts of only one study). If duplicated reports are found, e.g. studies with 
the same participants, with the same outcome measurements and using the same time 
points for the assessments, the report with the smaller sample size will be excluded.   
After removing duplicate studies and reports, the authors will read the study titles and 
abstracts. Studies that clearly do not match the inclusion criteria for the review will be 
excluded. The selected studies will then be fully read under further scrutiny; the reasons 
for their exclusion will be presented. Disagreements between authors regarding study 
inclusion will be resolved by the third author (ANA). To optimize the process of screening 
and selection of studies, we will use Rayyan application (9).  

Two authors (ACPNP and APR) will independently extract data. Discrepancies or 
disagreements will be solved by a third author (CRRF). We will use a predefined form to 
extract data from included studies. The form will have information related to: - the patients 
(demographic and clinical characteristics); - the pharmacological treatment (name of the 
drug, treatment duration; dose); - time points used for the assessments; - number of 
patients lost to follow-up (in each group); - reasons for loss to follow-up; - approach for 
handling missing data (data imputation/how data imputation was performed, use of 
intention-to-treat approach); - sources of funding; - possibility of conflict of interests; - 
adverse events; - outcome measures; - protocol deviations. 
To assess the feasibility of performing a meta-analysis, we will also extract the following 
data for each primary and secondary outcome measure: - total number of patients (in 
each group); - number of events in each group (for dichotomous outcomes); - mean, 
standard deviation, standard error, median, interquartile range, minimum, maximum, 95% 
confidence interval (CI) (for continuous outcomes); - p-value . 

We will perform critical appraisal of included studies with Risk of Bias tool (10) as 
recommended by Cochrane Collaboration. We will evaluate the certainty of evidence 
using the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation 
(GRADE) (11). GRADE judgement is based on the overall risk of bias, consistency of the 
results, directness of the evidence, publication bias and precision of the results for each 
outcome. The GRADE profiler software, available online, will be used to summarize our 
findings on the certainty of evidence (12). Assessment of risk of bias (ACPNP and 
KMMM), and assessment of the certainty of evidence (VTC and NCJ) will be performed 
by two review authors. All the disagreements in the assessment of the risk of bias or the 
certainty of evidence will be solved through discussion or, if required, by consulting with 
a third author (ANA). 

We will use the forest.netmeta function of the netmeta package to build and present the 
geometry of different interventions. We will use Nodes to represent the intervention and 
edges to show comparisons between interventions. 

We plan to use the netmeta package version 1.2-1 implemented in R-3.6.2 software for 
Mac to perform a network meta-analysis and synthesize the direct and indirect evidence 
of the therapeutic effect of the pharmacological therapeutic effects. We will use the node 
splitting method to assess an inconsistency between direct and indirect comparisons 
when there is a loop connecting three arms. We will present the treatment ranking by P-
scores based on the points estimates and standard error of the available network. 

In case of possible significant heterogeneity or inconsistency, we will use subgroup 
analysis. We will explore, when possible, the following available variables: age, sex, 
comorbidities, strategy to address pandemic threat (e.g. quarantine, lockdown, social 
distance) and disease severity. We will also perform sensitivity analysis for include 
studies with high risk of bias, missing data. 

To investigate the influence of small-studies effects, we will use the visual inspection 
method of funnel plot when at least ten studies were included in a meta-analysis, followed 
by Egger's test (10). 

This rapid living review will systematically evaluate the best available evidence on the 
pharmacological treatment of COVID-19, which we expect will help the front line on their 
decision-making processes. Currently, there is no evidence from RCT that has shown 
potential improvements in outcomes in patients with confirmed COVID-19. In addition to 
the fact that there is no drug with proven efficacy or approval by drug regulatory agencies 
for the treatment of COVID-19. However, to date, there are almost two thousand ongoing 
trials on SARS-CoV-2 infection registered in WHO ICTRP. While different therapeutic 
classes emerge as possible treatments against COVID-19, the availability of drug-related 
information, time to clinical improvement, adverse events and mortality rate are still 
challenging. There is an urgent need to find reliable evidence on which pharmacological 
treatment is more effective and safer for treating SARS-CoV-2 infection. 
To ensure the quality of the results, we will follow the Cochrane Handbook of Systematic 
Reviews recommendations (10). We believe this rapid systematic review with network 
meta-analysis and extensive searches will be able to summarize the current available 
evidence on pharmacological treatments and to provide important information for clinical 
decision-making on COVID-19 that has recently emerged and caused a deadly pandemic. 
