This research analyzed associations between meta-concerns and anxious and depressive 
symptoms at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic in Brazil. 2,042 individuals participated, 
aged 18-78 years. A sociodemographic questionnaire, the 4-item Patient Health Questionnaire 
and the Meta-Worry Questionnaire were answered online. Four Logistic Regression models were 
used to estimate the effect of independent variables on anxiety and depression symptoms. The 
variables being younger, not having a steady income, feeling ill, and exhibiting a high level of 
meta-worries increased the chances of showing symptoms. It was concluded that providing care 
in the face of psychological suffering is fundamental in combating COVID-19, since factors of 
susceptibility to the development of mental disorders were detected at the beginning of the 
pandemic in Brazil. 

The International Health Regulations [World Health Organization (WHO), 2005, p. 9] 
states that a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC) means an extraordinary 
event that “(i) constitutes a public health risk to other countries due to the international spread of 
diseases and (ii) potentially requires a coordinated international response.” Considered the 
highest level of alertness by the WHO, PHEICs only occurred before during the H1N1 pandemic 
(2009), the international spread of the poliovirus (2014), the Ebola outbreaks (2014 and 2018), 
and the increase in cases of microcephaly and congenital malformations caused by the Zika virus 
(2016) [Pan-American Health Organization (PAHO) & WHO, 2020].  

Currently, the world is facing the sixth PHEIC with the outbreak of the new human 
coronavirus (PAHO & OMS, 2020). In total, there are seven human coronaviruses, three of 
which can cause severe respiratory tract infections: SARS-COV, MERS-COV, and the current 
SARS-COV-2, which causes COVID-19 (PAHO & WHO, 2020). Responsible for over one 
million deaths by early November 2020 (em 02/11: 1.204.003), COVID-19 has made countries 
around the world adopt isolation and social distancing measures to prevent further contagion and 
contain its progress, while effective forms of prevention and treatment are researched (Faro et 
al., 2020; PAHO & WHO, 2020).  

Widespread outbreaks of infectious diseases, such as COVID-19, are associated with 
psychological distress and symptoms of mental illness. Most existing studies were conducted in 
China, the first epicenter of the pandemic as we write, and observed mainly anxiety disorders 
such as common mental disorder (CMD) associated with COVID-19 occurrence in different 
countries (Huang & Zhao, 2020). In this sense, evidences from previous studies on events similar 
to COVID-19, such as MERS-COV and SARS-COV, show that measures to separate and restrict 
the flow of people have a massive impact on mental health, causing negative psychological 
outcomes such as CMD (Brooks et al., 2020; Jiloha, 2020). Symptoms of stress, irritability, 
insomnia, post-traumatic stress disorder, depression, anxiety, substance abuse, suicide attempts, 
and self-injury behaviors are frequently observed in health care professionals and in the general 
population who, in this type of stressful situation, worry about uncertainties regarding the future, 
intensely fear of the risks of contagion and death (Brooks et al., 2020; Faro et al., 2020). In a 
study including 1210 participants, higher rates of anxiety and depression were associated with 
women, students, people with symptoms suggestive of COVID-19, and those with poor health 
perceptions, while availability of information and engagement in preventive behaviors such as 
washing hands seemed to soften these effects (Wang et al., 2020). 

People with suspected COVID-19 were more likely to have depressive symptoms and 
lower quality of life than those without the disease (Nguyen et al., 2020). Regarding anxiety, its 
concept is based on a tripartite structure formed by worry, fear, and uncertainty, which are 
present in the current pandemic situation (Barari et al., 2020; Dong & Bouey, 2020; Faro et al., 
2020; Kong et al., 2020). The current context is marked by the experience of uncertainty in terms 
of an effective vaccine or treatment of COVID-19 and expectations regarding the end of this 
pandemic. Simultaneously, there is fear of contagion, of death itself or death of significant ones, 
besides social isolation. Finally, the third facet of anxiety is fueled by worry about what is 
expected for the post-pandemic future.  

In the domain of worry, metacognitive processes play an important role, since they 
contribute, correct, assess, and regulate thoughts, besides being closely connected to the 
development and maintenance of psychological disorders (Dinis & Gouveia, 2011). Generally, 
high levels of worry can trigger different psychiatric symptoms, many of them related to 
common mental disorders, for instance anxiety or depression. During the COVID-19 outbreak, 
exposure to information by the media may trigger both unrealistic optimism and negative 
thoughts, which can accentuate distorted predictions about health or even exaggerated worrying 
(Faro et al., 2020). In this sense, studies investigating relations between worries and mental 
health have shown that outcomes related to anxiety and depression are common in contexts 
where there is excessive worrying (Huang & Zhao; 2020; Topper, Emmelkamp, Watkins, & 
Ehring, 2017).  

The ongoing pandemic of COVID-19 is inducing fear, uncertainty, and worry, which lead 
to the need for a timely understanding of the repercussions on people’s health status and 
psychological adjustment. In Brazil, for instance, no information has yet been found on the 
psychological impact and mental health of the general public in the initial period of the COVID-
19 epidemic, which corresponded to March 2020 (Duarte, Santo, Lima, Giordani, & Trentini, in 
press). This is especially relevant due to the uncertainties surrounding an outbreak of 
incomparable magnitude in recent history, which makes it pertinent to understand how this 
situation has affected the mental health of the population at the beginning of the period of social 
isolation and quarantine due to COVID-19. Based on information from that initial moment, 
possibly more effective actions can be undertaken with a preventive character or even better 
structuring of health care throughout the crisis. 

This study aimed to analyze the associations between meta-worry and symptoms of 
anxiety and depression in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic. Data collection was conducted in 
the initial period of the recommendation of social isolation and quarantine for suspected and 
confirmed cases in Brazil, in March, 2020. To do so, initially the occurrence of anxious and 
depressive symptoms was estimated. Then, the mean of the meta-worry score was calculated. 
Finally, we tested a predictive model in which meta-worrying explains the variability of anxiety 
and depression symptoms in the population. 

A total of 2042 Brazilians, of both sexes, aged between 18 and 78 years, participated in 
the study at late March 2020. The sample comprised mainly individuals located in the Northeast 
region (80%, n = 1634), with 14.1% (n = 288) in the Southeast, and 5.9% (n = 120) in other 
regions of the country. Specifically, in relation to the Northeast region, 74.6% of the individuals 
(n = 1219) lived in Sergipe. The sampling used was non-probabilistic, by convenience, and via 
online collection. The only inclusion criterion set was age over 18 years.  

In the State of Sergipe, which makes up most of the sample, the government decree 
showing the public health emergency situation was issued on March 17. For the Southeast 
region, which concentrated the second largest part of the sample, the state of São Paulo decreed 
it on March 20, the state of Minas Gerais on March 15, the state of Rio de Janeiro on March 16, 
and the state of Espírito Santo, on March 17. For the other regions, dates varied between March 
16 and 19. 

A sociodemographic questionnaire was used with the variables: sex (male or female), age 
(in years), skin color (white, black or brown; yellow and indigenous were excluded of the final 
sample due to small occurrence in the sample), education (up to high school or higher 
education), living alone (no or yes), chronic disease (no or yes), income (with or without steady 
income), health perception (ill or healthy), municipality and State of living (place of residence). 

The worry levels were assessed using the Meta-Worry Questionnaire (MWQ), developed 
by Wells (2005). The Portuguese version of the MWQ was adapted and validated by Dinis and 
Gouveia (2011), with good internal consistency (α = 0.89). The instrument includes seven items, 
in the form of questions, assessed separately on two scales that assess the frequency of 
metacognitions about worry and the degree of beliefs related to them. In the present study, only 
the scale that evaluates the frequency of worry was used, due to the intention to conduct a brief 
mental health screening and, therefore, the need for the smallest possible research instrument. 
Answers are obtained using a 4-point Likert scale, ranging from “never” (1) to “always” (4). The 
score is obtained by adding the answers of all items, indicating that the higher the frequency of 
worry, the greater the probability of being dysfunctional. In this investigation, the instrument 
showed high internal consistency (Cronbach’s alpha [α] = 0.90).  

To identify the existence of symptoms of anxiety and / or depression, we used the 4-item 
version of the Patient Health Questionnaire [PHQ-4], Portuguese version, developed by 
Kroenke, Spitzer, Williams, and Löwe (2009). In the initial study, the instrument showed good 
internal consistency (α = 0.75). The PHQ-4 is a ultra-short screening questionnaire that assesses 
the frequency of symptoms of anxiety and / or depression over the preceding two weeks, with 
responses scored on a 4-point Likert scale, ranging from “never” (1) to “almost every day” (4). 
The total score is obtained by the separate sum of the responses of the items referring to the 
symptoms of anxiety (“feeling nervous, anxious or very tense” and “not being able to prevent or 
control worries”) and depression (“feeling down, depressed, or without perspective” and “little 
interest or little pleasure in doing things”), where a score of three indicates significant signs of 
anxiety and / or depression disorders. In the current study, we applied a cutoff at score three 
because this survey just aimed screening significant symptomatology of anxiety or depressive 
disorders. The PHQ-4 had satisfactory reliability in this research (α = 0.84). 

Data collection was conducted using an invitation sent via social networks, mainly 
Facebook and Instagram. The research was approved by CONEP, the National Research Ethics 
Committee, under approval number [omitted for evaluation]. The online questionnaire was 
directed to the general population and the public was asked to forward the survey to other people 
in their social life. A Free and Informed Consent Form was located at the beginning of the 
questionnaire, which could only be completed if the individual agreed to participate. In order to 
be a short screening, the average response time was 5 minutes, according to the automatic 
registration of the platform used for data collection. 

The data adjustment and analysis procedures were performed using the SPSS (Statistical 
Package for Social Sciences, version 23). The final scores of the instruments were obtained with 
descriptive analyses (absolute and percentage frequency, mean, and standard deviation). Four 
Binomial Logistic Regression models (Backward LR method) were used to estimate the effects 
of the independent variables sex, skin color, education, living alone, having chronic illness, age 
(categorized by quartiles in up to 24 years, 25-30 years, 31-39 years, and over 39 years), income, 
health perception, and meta-worry (dichotomized by the mean in above the mean and up to the 
mean) towards symptoms of anxiety and depression.  

The PHQ-4 screening diagnoses were categorized by combining the presence of a single 
or simultaneous diagnosis (i.e. four groups: anxiety, depression, just one or both diagnosis). 
Thus, each group was used as a dependent variable (presence or absence of symptoms) in 
separated four logistic regression models. In the evaluation of each model, the following 
indicators were observed: Omnibus test (expected to be statistically significant), Nagelkerke’s R² 
(the higher the better, corresponding to the explained variance of the final model), the Hosmer-
Lemeshow test (expected not to be statistically significant), and correct predictive capacity of the 
model (expected around 70%). The multicollinearity assessment was performed for all models 
and no problems were found in the composition or final solution of the models. It is worth noting 
that all Odds Ratio (OR) values below 1 were converted by the formula 1/OR for purposes of 
standardizing the description of the findings. Significance was set at p < 0.05 for all steps of 
binomial and multinomial regressions. 

The sample consisted of 75.9% (n = 1549) female participants and 24.1% (n = 493) male, 
with a median age of 30 years, of which 28.5% (n = 582) were aged up to 24 years, 23.6% (n = 
482) were between 25 and 30 years old, 23.1% (n = 472) were between 31 and 39 years old, and 
24.8% (n = 506), over 39. Regarding skin color, 45.5% (n = 929) declared to be brown, 44.1% (n 
= 900) white, and 10.4% black (n = 212). Most participants (87.7%; n = 1790) did not live alone, 
that is, shared their residence with someone (family member or friend). Regarding education, 
82.8% (n = 1691) had a higher education degree (completed or students) and 17.2% (n = 351) up 
to a secondary education level. Regarding income, 72.6% (n = 1483) had steady income, and 
27.4% (n = 559) declared they did not have it. Most participants perceived themselves as healthy 
(81.4%; n = 1662) and only 18.3% (n = 373) declared to suffer from some chronic disease.  

On the meta-worry scale (Mean [M] = 12.5, Standard Deviation [SD] = 4.90), 41% (n = 
837) of the participants scored above the mean, and 59.0% (n = 1205) scored values up to the 
mean. As for anxiety or depression symptoms (cutoff at score three), 36.2% (n = 739) had 
symptoms suggestive of anxiety, 24.8% (n = 506) had symptoms suggestive of depression, 
42.8% (n = 873) had symptoms suggestive of just one diagnosis (anxiety or depression), and 
18.2% (n = 372) had both. In the full sample, 57,2% (n = 1169) of the participants did not show 
significant symptoms for anxiety and/or depression. 

Four binomial logistic regressions were performed, one for each of the PHQ-4 outcomes 
and another two for the possible combinations of these outcomes. Table 1 shows the results of 
each model, as well as their adjustment indicators, which were all satisfactory, with high 
predictive capacity and explained variance. It was found none multicollinearity issues between 
the variables in all models. Regarding the first model, related to anxious symptoms, younger 
people (up to 24 years old) showed 1.6 more chances of having symptoms than those over 39 
years old (OR = .6; 1/OR = 1.5). Individuals who reported not having a steady income were more 
likely to have anxious symptoms than those who had a steady income (OR = 1.4), and those who 
perceived themselves as ill also showed more chances of having symptoms suggestive of anxiety 
than those who perceived themselves as healthy (OR = 2.1). The meta-worry variable showed 
that those who scored above the mean had a 12-fold higher chance of having anxious symptoms 
than those who scored up to the mean (OR = 12.0).  

In the outcome related to depressive symptoms (second model), younger people (up to 24 
years old) showed more chances of having symptoms in relation to all age groups of older 
people: in relation to those between 25 and 30 years old, they showed 1.6 more chances (OR = 
0.6; 1/OR = 1.6), in relation to those who were between 31 and 39, they had two times more 
chances (OR = 0.5; 1/OR = 2), and in relation to those who were over 39, they had 2.5 times 
more chances (OR = .4; 1/OR = 2.5) of presenting depressive symptoms. Those who perceived 
themselves as ill were 2.5 times more likely to have depressive symptoms than those who 
perceived themselves as healthy (OR = 2.4). Those who declared living alone were about 1.5 
times more likely to have depressive symptoms than those who did not live alone (OR = 1.4). 
Regarding meta-worries, those who scored above the mean on the scale showed approximately 
6.5 more chances of symptomatology suggestive of depression than those who scored up to the 
mean (OR = 6.6). 

In the third model, related to the outcome of just one diagnosis (anxious or depressive 
symptoms), the youngest (up to 24 years old) showed 1.5 more chances of having one of the 
symptomatologies compared to those between 31 and 39 years old (OR = 0.7; 1/OR = 1.4), and 
two times more chances compared to those over 39 (OR = 0.5; 1/OR = 2). Regarding income, 
those who did not have a steady income showed more chances of having any of the set of 
symptoms compared to those who had a steady income (OR = 1.3), as well as those who 
perceived themselves as ill in relation to those who perceived themselves as healthy (OR = 2.4). 
Those who scored above the mean on the meta-worry scale were about 11.5 times more likely to 
have symptoms suggestive of anxiety or depression than those who scored up to the mean (OR = 
11.4). 

Finally, in the outcome related to having both set of symptoms (fourth model), those who 
were up to 24 years old were two times more likely to present them in relation to both the group 
between 31 and 39 years old and in relation to those who were over 39 years old (OR = 0.5; 
1/OR = 2). Not having a steady income and perceiving oneself as ill increased the chances of 
having anxious and depressive symptoms in relation to those having a steady income (OR = 1.3) 
and who perceived themselves as healthy (OR = 2.4). Those who scored above the mean on the 
meta-worry scale were about 13 times more likely to have both set of symptoms than those who 
scored up to the mean (OR = 12.7). 

The present investigation aimed to examine associations between meta-worry and 
significant anxious and/or depressive symptoms in the Brazilian people during the beginning 
of the COVID-19 pandemic. It is noteworthy that all models had an excellent outcome, with 
explained variance relatively high, around 40%, in addition to high values of correctly 
predicted cases. Consistency of the explanatory variables was also observed, which did not 
have much variation depending on the outcome. In this sense, it was found that there are basic 
characteristics that predicted the greatest predisposition to presenting symptoms of anxiety 
and depression related to age, steady income, perception of health, and meta-worry. 
Exceptionally, living alone was a significant explanatory variable only for depression. 

Regarding age, we observed that the chance of younger people presenting symptoms 
in all outcomes was higher. In all models evaluated, the group of those who were up to 24 
years old was more vulnerable to anxious and / or depressive symptoms at the time of 
collection. It is noteworthy that younger people generally have less experience in relation to 
different psychosocial stressors when compared to older people, and some of these stressors 
seem to be aggravated in the current pandemic scenario. As an example, the younger you are, 
the more likely you are to be at the beginning of your professional career and still looking for 
financial stability, which increases the probability of not having a steady or regular income 
either (Huang & Zhao, 2020; Liu, Zhang, Wong, & Hyum, 2020), and a steady income was 
also a variable present in all outcomes (except in depression, isolatedly). It is also worth 
noting the current findings come up in a scenario of 2 months after the start of the adoption of 
quarantine and social distance measures (period of the data collection); in another words, a 
situation in which stressors related to unemployment and income were already feared and 
shared socially. 

Another important variable was the perception of health. Results showed that those 
who perceived themselves as ill showed a higher probability of having symptoms of anxiety 
and / or depression. In other words, participants who already had some level of previous 
health issue or vulnerability seem, on average, to have twice the chance of developing some 
symptoms of anxiety or depression. Due to the daily stress related to the day-to-day life of the 
pandemic - to which they had already been exposed for 2 months - at the beginning of the 
confinement those individuals who declared their perception of health as deteriorated may 
have already had some differentiated vulnerability. Poor health perception was associated 
with higher rates of depression and anxiety during the COVID-19 pandemic also in other 
studies (Wang et al., 2020), especially if the perception of illness is related to the suspected 
contagion by the coronavirus (Nguyen et al., 2020), which reinforces the consonance of this 
finding with previous evidence. 

The variable living alone, which can refers to the perception of less social support, 
increased the chances only for depressive symptoms only. On this, the literature shows that 
individuals who live alone are less likely to share worries and fears throughout the pandemic, 
except through devices (Jacob, Haro, & Koyanagi, 2019; Stahl, Beach, Musa, & Schulz, 
2017). Then, it seems plausible to think that, if affected by COVID-19, these individuals seem 
to have less perception that they would eventually obtain support to deal with the disease. 

Finally, it was detected that the main explanatory variable of this study was meta-
worry, which considerably increased the chances of symptoms in the 2 possible outcomes, 
reaching almost 13 times more chances for the presence of symptoms of anxiety and 
depression, simultaneously. In terms of diagnosis, meta-worry is a key element for anxious 
symptoms and in the context of the current pandemic the scenario itself is conducive to the 
development of different worries, there is the fear of contagion, of death itself or of loved 
ones, in addition to imposed social isolation (Liu et al., 2020). In this regard, outcomes related 
to the symptoms of anxiety and depression are common in contexts associated with excessive 
meta-worrying (Topper et al., 2017) and studies already show vulnerability to these 
conditions in people who spend a considerable amount of time with cognitions related to the 
pandemic (Huang & Zhao, 2020). During epidemics, the number of people whose mental 
health is affected tends to be greater than the number of people affected by the disease and 
tends to outlast the epidemic itself (Shigemura, Ursano, Morganstein, Kurosawa, & Benedek, 
2020), which brings to the agenda, in the Brazilian context, the topic of excessive worrying. 

As limitations of the present study, the sample is not directly generalizable, given its 
non-randomization; however, its size helps to provide greater reliability to the findings and 
increases the likelihood of replicability. The results were obtained mainly in the Brazilian 
Northeast and with groups with specific demographic characteristics, i.e. women and high 
level of scholarity. Furthermore, although meta-worry is an important explanatory variable, 
other potentially important mediators were not measured, such as tolerance to anxiety and 
coping strategies, making it impossible to investigate whether, even with a high level of 
worry, such variables would mitigate the chance of belonging to positive groups. Thus, it is 
suggested that future studies include mediators in the analysis in order to better understand the 
predictive capacity of meta-worry in anxiety and depression. In addition, considering the 
different phases of social isolation and consequences of the pandemic, it is pertinent that 
longitudinal studies monitor its impact on the mental health of individuals during and after the 
pandemic. 

Finally, given the current global scenario, which is quite critical and has an unknown 
impact, particularly in Brazil, the importance of monitoring the mental health of the Brazilian 
population is emphasized. Therefore, we believe that research and interventions aimed at 
relieving psychological suffering are essential and should be part of the public health policy 
proposal to fight COVID-19 in the present and in the long term. 
