The psychology of religion has stemmed from the mainstream psychology. Due to 
the increased interest by psychologists to study religion from a scientific 
perspective, gave rise to study of religion from a psychological point of view. This 
essay endeavours to establish the history of psychology of religion; the major 
historical developments and methodological approaches used by the American 
and European scholars. The essay acknowledges the interesting journey the field 
of psychology of religion and spiritualties has taken from a philosophical 
conception to psychology. It highlights the methodological challenges it has and 
still faces from the American and European perspectives. The psychology of 
religion is both an interesting and challenging field, which has undergone a lot of 
changes, denials and shortcoming because of the nature of religion and 
spiritualties. However, this article establishes that tremendous job has been done 
both American and European efforts. 

Loewenthal (2008) argued that, the all history of the psychology of religion began with Wilhelm 
Wundt in 1879 as many scholars unanimously regard it him to be. He further stated that, while 
working at the University of Leipzig in 1879 Wilhelm turned psychology into a science by 
establishing the first ever-psychological laboratory. He however observed that some other 
scholars argue defiantly that it was actually an American psychologist William James who 
emerged has a major figure in the psychology of religion. Nelson (2009) stated that William 
James was said to have been very instrumental in the realization of the psychology of religion; 
and that in 1891 James published his magnum opus “The Principles of Psychology” and then in 
1902 “The Varieties of Religious Experience”. Even though William was actively a philosopher 
lecturing in the department of philosophy at Harvard University his magnum opus “The 
Varieties of Religious Experience” contributed greatly to psychology of his later writings.  

During this period psychologists sought to separate psychology from philosophy and the study of 
religion from theology, observed Upton (2008). He further stated that Max Muller in 1873 wrote 
“The Introduction to the Science of Religion” and in 1889, he wrote “Natural Religion”. E.B 
Taylor in 1871 “Wrote Primitive Culture”.  It should be noted that these publications gave rise 
to the new methodologies in the study of religion. Hence, the beginning of the application of the 
newly emerging methodologies in the study of religion.  

Connolly (1999) observed that American scholars are said to have pioneered the psychological 
investigations into the study of religion. Although European scholars such as Francis Galton in 
his statistical investigations into the efficacy of prayer of 1869 contributed as well to the 
scientific study of religion, however, not as much as American scholars did. He further noticed 
that actually an American psychologist Starnley Hall even founded the first school of religious 
psychology at Clark University. Loewenthal (2008) added that it was Hall who actually invited 
Sigmund Freud and Karl Jung to America in 1909 in pursuit of psychological discoveries. Hall 
was specialized in the moral and religious education of children. Psychologists of religion have 
unanimously traced their field back to 1882 when Hall published an address on moral and 
religious education. 

The historical breakthrough came about when the two major trends were realised in how to study 
religion within psychology. Kruger (1981) stated that, there were basically two fundamental 
trends in the development and study of psychology of religion; that is descriptive and 
explanatory. Descriptive trend approaches religion from within. It’s rooted in the religious 
writings such as scriptures of religious traditions, non-canonical works for spiritual elevation 
such as St Augustine’s confessions. While the explanatory trend approaches religion from 
without. He argued that this trend could be traced back to 3rd century B.C.E when Greek 
philosophers such Euhemerus to enlightenment period with philosophers such as David Hume 
who concluded that religion was a product of fear hence religion was not what it appeared to be. 
Therefore, this approach wishes to explain religious phenomenon outside its religious writings. 
Philosophers Euhemerus, Lucretius and psychologists Ludwig and Freud were very instrumental 
in the use of this approach. Upton (2008) noted that, although it was possible for scholars to 
utilize both trends only one can be emphasised as is the case with the entire psychology of 
religion literature. These trends gave birth to methodological approaches in the study of 
psychology of religion.  

There are two methods that have prevailed in the history of psychology of religion. These are 
quantitative and qualitative research methods and sometimes both of them have been combined 
(mixed method) in the study of religion. However, Kruger (1981) observed that the American 
theorists and psychologists have preferred quantitative methods while their European 
counterparts have preferred qualitative methods. Quantitative research methods have been 
referred to as „scientific approach’. This has been linked to the studies of Clarke, Hall, Starbucks, 
and Leuba among other American scholars. Kruger further observed that the European 
psychologists and scholars have tended to use internal approaches to the study of religion rather 
than rigorous scientific approaches that study what can only be verified by our sense experience 
which is dependent on external data.  

According to Kruger’s (1981) observations; Francis Galton was said to have been the first to 
carry out the studies of religion in scientific nature as he studied the objective efficacy of 
petitionary prayer. Durkheim similarly applying methods of statistical correlation established his 
treaties “The elementary Forms of Religious Life”.  Moreover, psychologists such as Starnley 
Hall introduced the questionnaire method of the scientific approach in the collection of religious 
data. His students Starbuch and Leuba utilized the same scientific approaches in their study of 
religion.  Upton (2008) stated that starbuch in his study of the psychology of conversion used 
statistical analysis by means of frequency distributions and percentages. It could be noted that 
most American scholars were inclined to using laboratory tabulation and statistical references in 
their study of religion. This could be so because during this period as seen earlier, scholars were 
seeking to explain psychology of religion by the means of scientific methods. 

The biological foundations of religion approach in America has been a very controversial one in 
that it called for the relationship between mind and body. According to Connolly (1999), this 
approach tries to establish that bodily conditions have a profound influence on psychological 
states of a person. It argues that many religious rituals and practices appeal to our senses. Hall in 
his study of adolescent conversion became the first to use this approach stated Connolly (1999). 
He further stated that the other theorist to have used this method is L.L Dawson in his study 
about comprehending cults. However, he observed that other scholars have argued that actually 
this method was first used by Sir Francis Galton when he carried the first ever experiment in 
psychology of religion on the objective efficacy of petitionary prayer. 

On the contrary, in Europe, psychologists of religion have been deploying different methods to 
the study of religion. Connolly (1999) stated that, Wilhelm Wundt explained religions through 
the means of laboriously reconstructing religion’s past and hypothesizing an evolutionary 
process. He noted that, Karl Girgensohn of the Dorpat School applied the method of 
experimental introspection to the study of religious experience.  

The Germany psychologists such as Sigmund Freud ‘Moravian born’, Oskar Pfister and Karl 
Jung employed psychoanalytic method. Sigmund Freud who believed that religious beliefs and 
practices are rooted in the fears and wishes of childhood pioneered this method. Religion is 
viewed as the unconscious mind’s need for fulfillment. Furthermore, Religion was developed 
through psychosexual stages of development as stated by Loewenthal (2008). 

Moran (2000) observed that Europeans also championed the phenomenological approach 
through the likes of Rudolf Otto and Freindrich Heiler. Creswell (2013) described 
Phenomenology as an approach that uses qualitative research and focuses on the commonality of 
lived experience within a particular group. The fundamental goal of the approach is to arrive at a 
description of the nature of the particular phenomenon. This entailed a paradigm in religious 
studies that one needed to begin by suspending or blanketing personal beliefs and withholding 
personal judgments and academic theories about what he/she wanted to investigate prior to the 
study.  

Upton (2008) argued that Cognitive developmental approach to religion became very 
instrumental in understanding how a child adapts to environment and interprets events around 
him/her. He stated that Jean Piaget theorised that there were cognitive structures that underlined 
organized patterns of behavior known as schemata and that there was a gradual move with age 
and experience from mental activities based on observable behaviors to symbolically represent 
the cognitive structures.  According to Nelson (2009), this theory further stated that there is a 
relationship between age and mental development. He further argued that, this theory created a 
basis for religious theorists to explain religion and its elements. Theories such as moral 
development of Lawrence Kohlberg and religious development by Ronald Goldman (1960’s) 
were inspired by this approach. During 1970’s, James Fowler applied Piaget’s stage theory more 
expansively to religious development. Piaget’s approach became an important method of 
studying religion in Europe through linking it to child cognitive development. 

European psychologists such as Ivan Pavlov and B.F Skinner used Behaviorism as a method to 
study religious behavior. Upton (2008) argued that Behavioristic approach to the study of 
religion was tasked to explain religious observable behaviors in relation to environmental 
stimuli. He further observed that the theory is grounded in empiricism which empasises sense 
experience rather than reason as the source of knowledge. This method is founded on an 
assumption that fundamental facts of faith are measurable. 

Humanistic approach to the study of religion focuses on what it means to be an individual human 
being with the ability to choose our actions and find fulfillment. Humanistic theorists emphasise 
our personal responsibility for our actions and our power to plan and choose our behavior, 
elaborated Nelson (2009). He argued that the One of the main figures of this approach is William 
James (1891) with his famous works of “The Varieties of Religious Experiences” which was 
emphasising humanistic approach. The notable European humanistic psychologist is Abraham 
Maslow (1908-1870) who studied religious satisfaction and experience through humanistic 
methods. Nevertheless, Upton (2008) argued that the American theorists might have started this 
method though it was more embraced by the European counterparts. European theorists tended to 
stress qualitative methodologies in the study of religion through humanistic approach unlike the 
Americans with the likes of Starbuck, Coe and Leuba who stressed a rigorous scientific method. 

As discussed above, it could be noticed that psychology has rich history at its disposal. However, 
religion possesses a lot of challenges to be studied scientifically and psychologically, due to its 
association with metaphysics and human events that cannot easily be analysed with empirical 
framework. Fortunately, the different approaches engaged in the study of religion in the field of 
psychology ranging from external to internal approaches have made psychology of religion a 
success in trying to explain what religion and all its elements are, as can be concluded from the 
above findings. 
