Publication status: Preprint has been published in a journal as an article
DOI of the published article: https://doi.org/10.37135/chk.002.18.14
BIODIVERSITY, CULTURE AND BIOECONOMY IN LATIN AMERICA
Eduardo Fidel Héctor Ardisana, Bárbara Millet Gaínza
https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3791
Submitted on: 2022-03-16
Posted on: 2022-03-17 (version 1)
(YYYY-MM-DD)
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
Artículo de reflexión 
BIODIVERSITY, CULTURE AND BIOECONOMY IN LATIN AMERICA 
BIODIVERSIDAD, CULTURA Y BIOECONOMÍA EN LATINOAMÉRICA 
 
Eduardo Fidel Héctor Ardisana1, ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1371-7345 
Bárbara Millet Gaínza2, ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4848-0950 
 
1Instituto de Posgrado, Universidad Técnica de Manabí, Portoviejo, Ecuador, email: 
eduardo.hector@utm.edu.ec 
2Investigadora independiente, Portoviejo, Ecuador, email: barbaramilletgainza@gmail.com 
 
ABSTRACT 
In Latin America, the immense existing biodiversity is associated with the abundance of enormous 
practically unknown regions and the presence of indigenous peoples, in some cases uncontacted. 
Along with the profusion of life forms that have been preserved over the years, the danger of 
genetic erosion caused by indiscriminate exploitation stands out on the one hand, and on the other 
the attempts at appropriation by institutions and natural persons, at the expense of the prejudice of 
the communities that inhabit those areas, of their habits of life and of their cultural practices. The 
purpose of this article is to reflect on these issues, based on the documentary information published 
by various authors. The examples presented also demonstrate that the region can take advantage 
of biodiversity for its own development, under a bioeconomy model, in which the efforts of 
science, education and production institutions coexist, supported by government policies of respect 
for the environment, indigenous populations and the legal protection of heritage. 
KEYWORDS: Environment, natural resources, economic development 
 
RESUMEN 
En Latinoamérica, la inmensa biodiversidad existente está asociada a la abundancia de enormes 
regiones prácticamente desconocidas y la presencia de pueblos autóctonos, en algunos casos no 
contactados. Junto a la profusión de formas de vida que se han conservado a través de los años, 
destacan por una parte el peligro de erosión genética causada por la explotación indiscriminada, 
y por otra los intentos de apropiación por parte de instituciones y personas naturales, a costa del 
perjuicio de las comunidades que habitan esas áreas, de sus hábitos de vida y de sus prácticas 
culturales. El propósito de este artículo es reflexionar sobre estos temas, a partir de la 
información documental publicada por diversos autores. Los ejemplos presentados demuestran 
además que la región puede aprovechar la biodiversidad para su propio desarrollo, bajo un 
modelo de bioeconomía, en el que coexistan esfuerzos de instituciones de la ciencia, la educación 
y la producción amparadas en políticas gubernamentales de respeto al medio ambiente, las 
poblaciones autóctonas y la protección jurídica del patrimonio.  
PALABRAS CLAVE: Medio ambiente, recursos naturales, desarrollo económico 
 
Recibido: (07/02/2022) 
Aceptado: (04/03/2022) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Biodiversity, its conservation, and its responsible use occupy a central space in current debates on 
politics, science, and economics. At the Rio de Janeiro Summit, held in 1992, a discussion area 
was dedicated to the problems of the planet's survival, which resulted in the signing of the 
Convention on Biological Diversity.  
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3791
Of the many definitions of the term biodiversity, the one adopted at this event is the most 
comprehensive, considering it as: “(…) the variability of living organisms from any source, 
including, inter alia, terrestrial, marine and other aquatic ecosystems and the ecological complexes 
of which they are part; includes diversity within species, between species, and of ecosystems” 
(Naciones Unidas 1992:3). 
Although not much progress has been made in a general sense in complying with the agreements 
of that convention, the issue remains open and is reviewed periodically, due to the importance it 
has for the world and in particular for developing countries. It is precisely in these countries where 
the highest level of biodiversity exists, and also where it is most threatened. Latin America and the 
Caribbean stand out for their exceptional natural wealth, when compared to other regions of the 
planet, and also for the danger of erosion of these resources (León and Cárdenas, 2020). 
The very conception of biodiversity as a set of resources is misleading: Klier (2016) and Martínez 
et al. (2018) agree in stating that the preservation of biodiversity is assumed in western policies as 
the conservation of “the other”, that is, of animals, plants, and areas that, due to their 
characteristics, differ from the model of what is considered a developed society. In this way, 
communities and cultural practices associated with biodiversity and its responsible use by the 
members of these communities are excluded, and nature is given the connotation of merchandise. 
Developing countries, on the other hand, need to boost their economy, and most of them cannot 
do so if it is not at the expense of the rational use of that biological diversity that they must also 
protect. The concept of bioeconomy has recently emerged to define the efficient use of biological 
and natural resources, as well as the use of their waste to reduce the use of fossil energy and 
decarbonize the economy (Hodson, Henry y Trigo 2019). 
This article intends to reflect on the connections between Latin American biodiversity and its 
possibilities of insertion in the bioeconomy, without violating the cultural practices of ancestral 
peoples. 
 
METHODOLOGY 
 
This is a reflective article in which current information on the state of biodiversity in Latin America 
was analyzed, its link to the cultural practices of indigenous peoples, some examples of attempts 
to appropriate these resources by institutions and individuals, and the need to use the resources 
that biodiversity provides based on a model based on the bioeconomy. 
It is ascribed to the constructivist hermeneutic paradigm and the type of research is grounded 
theory. A review of documents on the topics addressed was carried out, which was used to 
formulate reflections on what the authors consider appropriate for the projection of the Latin 
American bioeconomy, through a balanced interaction between research, educational, productive 
and governmental institutions. 
 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
BIODIVERSITY IN LATIN AMERICA 
 
The exceptional animal and plant wealth present in Latin America and the Caribbean is a proven 
fact; almost 60% of the terrestrial species that inhabit the planet are found in this region, in addition 
to being characterized by a diverse marine and freshwater flora and fauna (UNEP 2018). 
In the particular conditions of Latin America, where large unexplored areas and communities that 
have not come into contact with "modernity" persist, the vision of biodiversity is polarized in two 
directions: on the one hand, the western/usufructuary, in which everything what exists on planet 
Earth can be considered a resource and is susceptible to massive exploitation; on the other, the 
traditional/indigenous, attached to respect for nature, coexistence with all species, and its rational 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3791
use and even worship. Unfortunately, as pointed by Martínez et al. (2018) although the properties 
of a resource are independent of human being, it is the latter who attributes its market value to it 
and who determines the extent to which it is exploited or conserved. 
From this perspective, a concept of biocoloniality is applied to the management of biodiversity 
(Beltrán 2016), on the basis that modern science is the only one capable of discerning truths and 
demonstrating concepts, which results from a dominant cultural reason projected to starting from 
the colonial domination itself that in other spaces (political, social, religious) modernity has 
exercised over the indigenous.  
As this author points out:  
The point is that Western thought, in its homogenizing and hegemonic tendency, has believed that 
its version is the version of the meaning of life and existence, without recognizing that other ways 
of seeing humanity and its existence are also valid, as well as the world it inhabits. (Beltrán 
2016:216) 
This violence is exercised even from the epistemological point of view, since the distinctions made 
between terms such as scientific knowledge and traditional knowledge reveal a supposed 
relationship of superiority of the former over the latter (Beltrán 2017). 
Research has been used in many cases as an excuse for the appropriation, by scientific institutions 
and private companies, of the resources that biodiversity offers, for their use in modern scientific 
programs and on some occasions to hold a monopoly on that biodiversity (Toro 2007). In this way, 
attempts have been made to kidnap, with greater or lesser success, the natural resources of Latin 
American biodiversity in order to use them for business interests. 
The most biodiverse Latin American regions are also those in which peoples, tribes and 
communities reside with habits, customs and cultural practices closely associated with that 
biodiversity.  
A primary consequence of the expansion of agriculture, industry, and urbanism into these areas 
has been the disappearance of animal and plant species that modern science has not even had time 
to discover; but that is not the object of these reflections, but the way in which the appropriation 
of the components of biodiversity has neglected the traditions of indigenous peoples, from a 
perspective of cultural superiority.  
Next, three cases will be presented in which it is shown how the science of developed countries 
has used native species, linked to ancestral practices of indigenous peoples, stripping them of this 
connotation and reducing them to that of a market object. 
 
AYAHUASCA 
 
In the Amazon basin, shamans use a concoction they call ayahuasca to induce a state of ecstasy in 
which visual and auditory hallucinations occur. Although there are different ways to prepare the 
drink, it is considered that the most common is the mixture of two plants (Banisteriopsis caapi and 
Psychotria viridis).  
The ingestion of ayahuasca has gained popularity in recent decades, acquiring in some areas an 
ethno-tourism interest, and even creating spiritual movements around its consumption, such as 
those called Santo Daime, União do Vegetal, Barquinha and others (Domínguez et al. 2016). 
The cultural connotation of the ayahuasca ceremony is undeniable, and in its original form it is 
considered as a cleansing of the body and spirit, as well as a connection with astral forces. Western 
science has found the explanation for the hallucinations it produces: Psychotria viridis contains 
dimethyltryptamine (DMT), a substance with powerful hallucinogenic effects; under normal 
conditions, the organism inhibits the metabolism of this substance in the intestine, but the                 
β-carbolines contained in Banisteriopsis caapi in turn counteract this inhibition, with which DMT 
reaches the central nervous system (Escobar 2015). The concoction has shown antidepressant 
properties (Sanches et al. 2016; Bouso & Sánchez 2020). 
Although these discoveries of medical value are relatively recent, ayahuasca aroused commercial 
interest long before. In 1986, the  US citizen Loren Miller, then director of the International Plant 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3791
Medicine Corporation (IPMC), was granted a plant patent application by the United States Patent 
and Trademark Office. which he called De Vine, which he had brought from the Amazon jungle 
in 1981, and which was none other than ayahuasca.  
The concession provoked numerous complaints from indigenous communities and an international 
lawsuit led by the Coordinator of Indigenous Organizations of the Amazon Basin (COICA). After 
long years of legal battle, the patent was withdrawn in 1999, but not as a direct consequence of the 
claims of the native peoples, but on the basis that a specimen of the plant had already rested in the 
Chicago Museum since before the request. Surprisingly, in 2001 Miller presented new documents 
and obtained the restitution of the patent until its expiration in 2003, although without rights 
beyond the genome of the plant and its asexual propagules (Beyer 2008). 
 
PEYOTE 
 
Peyote is a cactus native to the arid zones of Mexico and the southern US. Two species are included 
under that common name, Lophophora williamsii and Lophophora diffusa. The first of them 
produces mescaline and the second produces pellotine, alkaloids with high psychotropic effects 
similar to those of lysergic acid.  
Possibly these hallucinogenic properties have transcended much more in the Western world than 
its therapeutic action on various respiratory, rheumatic, and venereal diseases, which determine its 
medicinal use by Mexican indigenous people (Ibarra et al. 2015). In addition, Lophophora 
williamsii produces other alkaloids of pharmaceutical interest such as anhalidine, lophophorin and 
anhalonin (Santos & Camarena 2019). 
This is not the only plant that produces mescaline, since several South American species of the 
genus Trichocereus also synthesize this alkaloid (Cassels & Sáez 2018). However, Lophophora 
williamsii is the only one associated with cultural practices of shamanism, divine rites, and dream 
visions among the Mexican peoples of the Tarahumaras, the Coras and especially the Huicholes 
(Clavijo 2018).  
Mescaline has aroused interest for its pharmacological use in the treatment of headache, 
depression, obsession, anxiety, and addiction to some substances such as alcohol, in particular 
because the propensity to become dependent on mescaline is practically non-existent, and 
intoxications with this substance are moderate and not life-threatening (Dinis-Oliveira, Lança & 
Dias 2019).  
The metabolites obtained from Lophophora williamsii, like those of many other cacti, constitute a 
potential still little exploited in the pharmaceutical industry (Das et al., 2020), and have not aroused 
business desires similar to those of ayahuasca, possibly due to the results of the legal conflict 
surrounding the latter. 
 
POISON DART FROG 
 
The frog Epipedobates anthonyi is endemic to Peru, Colombia, and Ecuador; on its skin there is a 
powerful poison that has earned it its name and that drew the attention of science starting in the 
1970s. At that time, the chemist John Daly, of the US National Institute of Health, collected skins 
of this amphibian in Ecuador, which possibly left the country through diplomatic channels, since 
there is no evidence that the Ecuadorian Institute of Forestry and Natural Areas (INEFAN, later 
merged into the Ministry of Environment) has granted a license for the operation (GRAIN 1998). 
Laboratory studies led to the synthesis of a non-opioid alkaloid (epibatidine) of pharmaceutical 
interest. 
Epibatidine as a medicine did not prosper, because the threshold between its therapeutic efficiency 
and its contraindications is narrow; however, it served as a model for Abbot Laboratories to 
synthesize and patent the derivative ABT-594 in 1995, with an analgesic potency 200 times greater 
than morphine and without the dangerous effects of epibatidine (Angerer 2015).  
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3791
Through INEFAN, Ecuador filed a lawsuit against the patent in 1998, without results; the reasons 
given were that no evidence was found that in Ecuadorian folklore the skin of the frog was used 
for medicinal purposes, but rather as a poison for hunting, and that the synthesis of ABT-594 was 
not made directly from the skins of frogs, but taking their structure as a model (Jurado 2021). 
However, under the bioethical principle of utilitarianism or beneficence (maximum possible 
benefit for a greater number of people), it is valid to ask why the indigenous communities where 
the amphibian lives did not receive benefits (Proto 2019). 
 
¿BIODIVERSITY VS. BIOECONOMY? 
 
The appropriating vocation of a part of the Western world towards the resources offered by Latin 
American biodiversity is not new. Centuries of colonialism reduced Latin America to the status of 
exporter of raw materials for large industries (food, mining, textiles, and more recently, chemicals 
and pharmaceuticals) of developed countries.  
Meanwhile, these consolidated their hegemony in the manufacture of products made from these 
raw materials, so that today the probability of developing Latin American industries that can 
compete in the market with those existing in Europe, North America or even Asia is negligible. 
What Latin American businessman would try to displace Ford, Toyota, Monsanto, or BASF from 
the market, even in his own country? However, there is no doubt that the region must continue to 
grow towards economic development. How to do it then? 
There is a space that the development of the Latin American economy can occupy, and it is a 
paradox that the main resources to do so are found precisely in biodiversity, which, on the other 
hand, is essential to preserve. The central idea for this projection is based on the bioeconomy, 
which is centered on the efficient use of biological and natural resources and the recycling of their 
waste; its use has among its advantages the reduction of the use of energy provided by fossil fuels 
and the reduction of carbon emissions (Hodson, Henry & Trigo 2019).  
The application of an economic model built on the rational use of biodiversity would not only 
contribute to the health of terrestrial life, but also to the preservation of life itself, which, as Philp 
(2015) points out, cannot be maintained in the long term in the unsustainability conditions of the 
current model. 
A typical example of what is needed to develop the bioeconomy can be found in Brazil. In addition 
to having 15 % of the planet's species, Brazil has abundant land, a suitable climate, a low 
population per unit area and a large amount of natural resources; however, it is also an example of 
how the export of raw materials diverted the country from the creation of infrastructure, policies, 
and institutions capable of working from a bioeconomic perspective.  
Brazil must “run after lost time” (Valli, Russo & Bolzani 2018), which is also a reality for the 
entire subcontinent. Latin America enters this race with a disadvantage: between 1981 and 2014, 
in the pharmaceutical market 1,211 new products were introduced, of which 60 % were obtained 
from natural substances or were designed from structures found in nature (Newman & Cragg 
2016). 
Fortunately, Latin American biodiversity is immense, which provides opportunities to take 
advantage of the existence of numerous natural resources (many already discovered, but the vast 
majority still unknown) for use in the bioeconomy. See only the two cases described below. 
The ever-increasing food needs of the population and the animal species bred in captivity for 
human consumption are leading to the use of alternative sources of nutrients for these purposes. 
One of the variants coming to be exploited is the use of flour obtained from insects. The larvae of 
the black soldier fly (Hermetia illucens L.), a species native to America and now widespread 
throughout the world, can be converted into flour with a high protein content, useful in feeding 
fish (Meitiyani et al. 2020) and birds (Wahid et al. 2021).  
They are even beginning to be used as a substitute for part of the wheat flour in the bakery, with 
nutritional advantages over the latter in terms of protein and fiber content (González, Garzón & 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3791
Rosell 2019). In Ecuador, the first soldier fly meal production plant in Latin America was 
inaugurated at the end of 2021, operated by Bioconversión S.A. on the campus of the Escuela 
Superior Politécnica del Litoral, in Guayaquil (El Universo 2021). 
Acetogenins are natural substances that exhibit high antitumor activity, several orders of 
magnitude higher than that of some drugs commonly used in cancer chemotherapy. These 
compounds are found only in species of the Annona genus, such as custard apple (Annona 
cherimola Mill.), soursop (Annona muricata L.) and sugar apple (Annona squamosa L.). The 
phytochemical activity of acetogenins has been demonstrated in vitro, in animal tests, and in 
simulations of the human digestive system (Gutiérrez et al. 2020; León, Pájaro & Granados 2020; 
Naik, Dessai & Sellappan 2021; Nayak & Hedge 2021).  
The Annonaceae family is made up of about 2,500 species that grow naturally or are cultivated in 
the tropical regions of America, Asia, and Madagascar (González 2013), but many of these species 
are native to Latin America, mainly Ecuador, Peru, and Brazil. It is therefore noteworthy that most 
of the studies on the antitumor potential of acetogenins and their application in pharmacology have 
been carried out in laboratories in Europe, the USA and Asia. 
Based on these two examples, it is clear that the region is still very timidly projected towards 
assuming an economic model that takes advantage of the potential of its biodiversity to generate 
innovative products within the framework of the bioeconomy. Coordinated efforts of various 
instances are needed to achieve an education-research-production-policy chain that leads Latin 
American countries down this path (Figure 1). 
 
Source: Authors' elaboration 
 
Figure 1: Institutional integration in a bioeconomic model for Latin America. 
 
In Latin America, biological wealth and cultural heritage are inseparable, and as Tinoco (2015) 
points out, both are assets that must be legally protected, so that cases such as that of ayahuasca 
and the arrowhead frog do not happen again. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3791
 
CONCLUSIONS 
 
Latin America hosts an important part of the Earth's biodiversity, closely linked to the existence 
of still unexplored regions and the presence of aboriginal communities that have not been 
contacted. The indigenous traditions of respect for nature and harmonious coexistence with it 
determine that this biodiversity is closely associated with cultural practices of different types. 
The utilitarian sense of Western culture has caused many forms of life to be converted into bio-
resources for science and production, as shown by the cases of ayahuasca, the poison dart frog and 
peyote. The intentions of appropriation are not limited to the economic aspect, but have 
transcended the epistemological field, establishing a border between scientific knowledge, 
obtained by research carried out in laboratories, and the so-called traditional knowledge. 
The competitive disadvantage of Latin American countries in the current scenario advises that they 
take advantage of the potential of their biodiversity to develop their economies. The existence of 
some examples in this sense shows that it is feasible to do so, provided that the efforts of 
educational, scientific, and productive institutions are harmonized under government policies of 
respect for ecology, indigenous communities, and the legal protection of that heritage. 
 
DECLARATION OF CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: The authors declare that they have no 
conflicts of interest. 
 
AUTHORS CONTRIBUTION DECLARATION: Eduardo Fidel Héctor Ardisana (55 %) y 
Bárbara Millet Gaínza (45 %). 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL REFERENCES 
Angerer, K. (2015). Estudio de caso 1: Epipedobates anthonyi bajo la apertura delimitada. En: 
Recursos Genéticos como Información Natural (M. Ruiz-Muller, ed.). 2da ed. Sociedad 
Peruana de Derecho Ambiental, Lima, Perú. 
Beltrán, Y. J. (2016). La biocolonialidad en las relaciones entre investigadores de la biodiversidad 
y las comunidades en Colombia. Tabula Rasa, 24, 213-240. 
Beltrán, Y. (2017). Violencia epistémica en la protección de los conocimientos “tradicionales”. 
Ciencia Política, 12(24), 115-136.   
Beyer, 
S. 
(3 
de 
enero 
de 
2008). 
Singing 
to 
the 
plants. 
https://singingtotheplants.com/2008/01/ayahuasca-patent-case/ 
Bouso, J. C. & Sánchez, C. (2020). Traditional healing practices involving psychoactive plants 
and the global mental health agenda: opportunities, pitfalls, and challenges in the “right to 
science” framework. Health and Human Rights Journal, 22(1), 145-150. 
Cassels, B. K. & Sáez, P. (2018). Dark classics in chemical neuroscience: mescaline. ACS 
Chemical Neuroscience, 9(10), 2448-2458. 
Clavijo, N. (2018). Etnobotánica de Lophophora williamsii (Tesis de grado). Universidad de 
Sevilla, 
España. 
https://idus.us.es/bitstream/handle/11441/70936/CLAVIJO%20GONZ%c3%81LEZ%2c%2
0NAZARET.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y  
Das, G., Lim, K. J., Tantengco, O. A. G., Carag, H. M., Gonçalves, S., Romano, A., Das, S. K., 
Coy-Barrera, E., Shin, H. S., Gutiérrez-Gurjalva, E. P., Heredia, J. B. & Patra, J. K. (2020). 
Cactus: Chemical, nutraceutical composition and potential bio-pharmacological properties. 
Phytotherapy Research, 35(3). https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ptr.6889  
Dinis-Oliveira, R. J., Lança, C. & Días, D. (2019). Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic aspects 
of peyote and mescaline: clinical and forensic repercussions. Current Molecular 
Pharmacology, 12, 184-194. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3791
Domínguez, E., Soler, J., Elices, M., Pascual, J. C., Álvarez, E., De la Fuente, M., Friedlander, P., 
Feilding, A. & Riba. J. (2016). Ayahuasca: pharmacology, neuroscience and therapeutic 
potential. Brain Research Bulletin, 126, 89-101. 
El Universo. (5 de diciembre 2021). En Ecuador la producción de harina de mosca, que ya se 
inició, 
reduciría 
emisiones 
de 
CO2 
y 
la 
deforestación. 
https://www.eluniverso.com/larevista/ecologia/en-ecuador-la-produccion-de-harina-de-
mosca-que-ya-se-inicio-reduciria-emisiones-de-co2-y-la-deforestacion-nota/ 
Escobar, G. (2015). Las propiedades farmacocinéticas del ayahuasca. Liberabit, 21(2), 313-319. 
González, M. E. (2013). Chirimoya (Annona cherimola Miller), frutal tropical y sub-tropical de 
valores promisorios. Cultivos Tropicales, 34(3), 52-63. 
González, C. M., Garzón, R. & Rosell, C. M. (2019). Insects as ingredients for bakery goods. A 
comparison study of H. illucens, A. domestica and T. molitor ﬂours. Innovative Food Science 
and Emerging Technologies, 51, 205-210. 
GRAIN. (17 de diciembre 1998). Biopiratería en Ecuador. https://grain.org/fr/article/entries/864-
biopirateriaen-ecuador?print=true 
Gutiérrez, M. T., Durán, A. G., Mejías, F. J. R., Molinillo, J. M. G., Megias, D., Valdivia, M. M. 
& Macías, F. A. (2020). Bio-guided isolation of acetogenins from Annona cherimola 
deciduous leaves: production of nanocarriers to boost the bioavailability properties. 
Molecules, 25, 4861. 
Hodson, E., Henry, G. y Trigo, E. (2019). La bioeconomía. Nuevo marco para el crecimiento 
sostenible en América Latina. Bogotá: Ed. Pontificia Universidad Javeriana, 384 pp. 
Ibarra, E., Zamudio, F., Pérez, C. A., Albert, V. A., Ramírez, E., Molina, J., Fernández, A., 
Calderón, C., Olivares, J. L., Herrera, A. & Herrera, L. (2015). De novo sequencing and 
analysis of Lophophora williamsii transcriptome, and searching for putative genes involved 
in mescaline biosynthesis. BMC Genomics, 16, 657. 
Jurado, M. A. (2021). Nuevos retos para los Estados respecto a la biopiratería en el contexto del 
discurso de la conservación de la biodiversidad: el caso de Ecuador. Sociedad y Ambiente, 24, 
1-20. 
Klier, G. (2016). La naturaleza que se conserva: una aproximación al concepto de biodiversidad. 
Apuntes de Investigación del CECYP, 27, 206-217. 
León, D. C. y Cárdenas, J. C. (2020). Latinoamérica y el Caribe: Riqueza natural y degradación 
ambiental 
en 
siglo 
XXI. 
PNUD 
LAC, 
14B, 
1-35. 
https://www1.undp.org/content/dam/rblac/Policy%20Papers%20COVID%2019/undp-rblac-
CD19-PDS-Number14B.pdf  
León, G., Pájaro, N. & Granados, C. (2020). Annonaceae squamosa una fuente de acetogeninas 
en la actualidad. Ciencia y Salud Virtual, 12(2), 88-101. 
Martínez, E., Ripoll, Y., Atencio, P. y Ontivero, M. (2018). Biodiversidad en América Latina. Un 
desafío dialógico del patrimonio natural entre los recursos y los bienes. Multequina, 27, 55-
61. 
Meitiyani, R. E., Dharma, A. P. & Annisa, R. (2020). Combination of Hermetia illucens L. maggot 
flour with fish feed against growth of Sangkuriang catifsh (Clarias sp.). Systematic Review 
Pharmacy, 11(1), 529-535. 
Naciones 
Unidas. 
(1992). 
Convenio 
sobre 
la 
Diversidad 
Biológica. 
https://www.cbd.int/doc/legal/cbd-es.pdf  
Naik, A. V., Dessai, S. N. & Sellappan, K. (2021). Antitumour activity of Annona muricata L. leaf 
methanol extracts against Ehrlich ascites carcinoma and Dalton’s lymphoma ascites mediated 
tumours in Swiss albino mice. Libyan Journal of Medicine, 16(1), 1846862. 
Nayak, A. & Hedge, K. (2021). A comprehensive review on the miracle nature of Annona muricata 
Linn. RGUHS Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 11(1), 1-8. 
Newman, D. J. & Cragg, G. M. (2016). Natural products as sources of new drugs from 1981 to 
2014. Journal of Natural Products, 79, 629-661. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3791
Philp, J. C. (2015). Balancing the bioeconomy: supporting biofuels and bio-based materials in 
public policy. Energy & Environmental Science, 8, 3063-3068. 
Proto, F. (2919). Biopiratería o participación justa en los beneﬁcios que se deriven de la utilización 
de los recursos genéticos y conocimientos tradicionales de comunidades rurales- indígenas en 
países del Sur global. Analéctica, 5, 32. 
Sanches, R. F., Osório, F. L., Dos Santos, R. G., Macedo, L. R. H., Maia-de-Oliveira, J. P. Wichert-
Ana, L., De Araujo, D. B., Riba, J., Crippa, J. A. S. & Hallak, J. E. C. (2016). Antidepressant 
effects of a single dose of ayahuasca in patients with recurrent depression. Journal of Clinical 
Psychopharmacology, 36(1), 77-81. 
Santos, M. S. & Camarena, N. G. (2019). Cacti for production of metabolites: current state and 
perspectives. Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology, 103(21-22), 8657-8667. 
Tinoco, J. C. (2015). Una experiencia latinoamericana en protección de los conocimientos 
tradicionales. El especial caso de Bolivia y Brasil. Revista Iberoamericana de la Propiedad 
Intelectual, 3, 37-95. 
Toro, C. (2007). Seguridad hemisférica, propiedad intelectual y biodiversidad en el marco de las 
negociaciones del TLC andino. Revista Pensamiento Jurídico, 18, 73-102. 
UNEP. (8 de junio 2018). Latin American and Caribbean countries champion marine 
conservation. United Nations Environment Programme. https://www.unep.org/news-and-
stories/story/latin-american-and-caribbean-countries-champion-marine-conservation 
Valli, M., Russo, H. M. & Bolzani, V. S. (2018). The potential contribution of the natural products 
from Brazilian biodiversity to bioeconomy. Anais da Academia Brasileira de Ciências, 90(1 
Suppl. 1), 763-778. 
Wahid, A. S., Purwanti, S., Daryatmo & Auza, F. A. (2021). Substitution of fishmeal with black 
soldier fly larvae (Hermetia illucens L) against the performance of native chickens grower 
phase. IOP Conf. Series: Earth and Environmental Science, 788, 012182. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3791
This preprint was submitted under the following conditions: 
The authors declare that they are aware that they are solely responsible for the content of the preprint and
that the deposit in SciELO Preprints does not mean any commitment on the part of SciELO, except its
preservation and dissemination.
The authors declare that the necessary Terms of Free and Informed Consent of participants or patients in
the research were obtained and are described in the manuscript, when applicable.
The authors declare that the preparation of the manuscript followed the ethical norms of scientific
communication.
The authors declare that the data, applications, and other content underlying the manuscript are
referenced.
The deposited manuscript is in PDF format.
The authors declare that the research that originated the manuscript followed good ethical practices and
that the necessary approvals from research ethics committees, when applicable, are described in the
manuscript.
The authors declare that once a manuscript is posted on the SciELO Preprints server, it can only be taken
down on request to the SciELO Preprints server Editorial Secretariat, who will post a retraction notice in its
place.
The authors agree that the approved manuscript will be made available under a Creative Commons CC-BY
license.
The submitting author declares that the contributions of all authors and conflict of interest statement are
included explicitly and in specific sections of the manuscript.
The authors declare that the manuscript was not deposited and/or previously made available on another
preprint server or published by a journal.
If the manuscript is being reviewed or being prepared for publishing but not yet published by a journal, the
authors declare that they have received authorization from the journal to make this deposit.
The submitting author declares that all authors of the manuscript agree with the submission to SciELO
Preprints.
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
