Publication status: Not informed by the submitting author
MIMESIS AND UNDERGRADUATE RESEARCH: RETHINKING HOW
RESEARCHER MORALITY IS FORMED IN TIMES OF HIGH
REGULATION
Pedro Savi Neto, Inês Maria Guimarães Nascimento, Mónica de la Fare
https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3578
Submitted on: 2022-02-06
Posted on: 2022-02-09 (version 1)
(YYYY-MM-DD)
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MIMESIS AND UNDERGRADUATE RESEARCH: RETHINKING HOW RESEARCHER 
MORALITY IS FORMED IN TIMES OF HIGH REGULATION 
 
PEDRO SAVI NETO1 
ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8781-5277 
INÊS NASCIMENTO2 
ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2063-1697 
MÓNICA DE LA FARE3 
 ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2660-4043 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Research ethics has been the object of an intense movement of regulation of research 
based on a preconceived model, under the logic of biomedical sciences. In this context of a mostly 
normative answer to the moral question, this article aims to offer arguments about the potential of 
forming morality through research practice. For this, it combines theoretical research, centered on the 
concepts of mimesis developed by Adorno and Benjamin, with the analysis of responses to an online 
questionnaire offered by undergraduate students in the humanities and social sciences with experience in 
undergraduate scientific research (USR). The formative potential of USR is affirmed, as it is a privileged 
instance for the analysis of mimetic behavior, allowing the learning of beginners through observation and 
the practical application of concepts from the moral field to research. 
 
Keywords: Undergraduate Scientific Research, Mimesis, Social Sciences and Humanities, Research 
ethics, Regulation of research. 
 
MIMESE E INICIAÇÃO CIENTÍFICA: REPENSANDO COMO A MORAL DO 
PESQUISADOR É FORMADA EM TEMPOS DE ALTA REGULAÇÃO 
 
RESUMO: A ética em pesquisa tem sido objeto de intenso movimento de regulação da conduta a partir 
de um modelo preconcebido, sob a lógica das ciências biomédicas. Nesse contexto de uma resposta 
majoritariamente normativa para a questão moral, este artigo objetiva oferecer argumentos sobre a 
potencialidade da formação da moralidade a partir da prática em pesquisa. Para isso, combina a pesquisa 
teórica, centrada nos conceitos de mimese desenvolvidos por Adorno e Benjamin, com a análise das 
respostas a um questionário on-line oferecidas por estudantes de graduação das ciências humanas e 
sociais com experiência em iniciação científica (IC). Afirma-se o potencial formativo da IC, pois é uma 
instância privilegiada para a análise do comportamento mimético, permitindo a aprendizagem dos 
iniciantes pela observação e pela aplicação prática de conceitos do campo moral à pesquisa. 
 
Palavras-chave: Iniciação científica, Mimese, Ciências humanas e sociais, Ética em pesquisa, Regulação 
da conduta. 
 
 
 
1 Programa de Pós-Graduação em Educação da Pontifícia Universidade Católica (PUCRS), Porto Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul 
(RS), Brasil. <pedro.savi@pucrs.br>   
2 Faculdade de Psicologia e Ciências da Educação da Universidade do Porto (FPCEUP), Porto, Portugal. <ines@fpce.up.pt>  
3 Programas de Pós-Graduação em Educação e em Serviço Social da Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul, 
(PUCRS), Porto Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul (RS), Brasil. <monica.fare@pucrs.br>  
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3578
 
 
 
 
 
 
MÍMESIS E INVESTIGACIÓN DE PREGRADO: REPENSAR CÓMO SE FORMA LA MORAL DEL 
INVESTIGADOR EN TIEMPOS DE ALTA REGULACIÓN 
 
RESUMEN: La ética de la investigación ha sido objeto de un intenso movimiento de regulación de la 
investigación a partir de un modelo preconcebido, bajo la lógica de las ciencias biomédicas. En este 
contexto de una respuesta mayoritariamente normativa a la cuestión moral, este artículo tiene como 
objetivo ofrecer argumentos sobre el potencial de formación de la moralidad a través de la práctica de la 
investigación. Para ello, combina la investigación teórica, centrada en los conceptos de mímesis 
desarrollados por Adorno y Benjamin, con el análisis de las respuestas a un cuestionario en línea ofrecido 
por estudiantes de pregrado en humanidades y ciencias sociales con experiencia en investigación científica 
de pregrado (ICP). Se afirma el potencial formativo de la ICP, por ser una instancia privilegiada para el 
análisis de la conducta mimética, permitiendo el aprendizaje de los principiantes a través de la observación 
y la aplicación práctica de conceptos del campo moral a la investigación. 
 
Palabras clave: Investigación Científica de Pregrado, Mímesis, Ciencias Sociales y Humanidades, Ética 
de la investigación, Regulación de la investigación.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3578
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Research ethics is a sensitive field, as it was at the center of serious ethical violations that 
occurred throughout human history, especially during World War II. The proliferation of norms declared 
aimed at protecting the moral field is a phenomenon that has been growing at an accelerated pace in 
recent years, especially in educational institutions, where it would be reasonable to have a preferentially 
formative answer to the question of research ethics. As a response to these violations, an intense 
normative movement began to regulate research, initially aimed at preventing the repetition of 
transgressions mostly practiced in the biomedical sciences, but which was spreading to other fields of 
research, most of the time without due respect to the particularities of the scientific areas that have come 
to be regulated (Israel and Hay, 2006). 
In Brazil, the movement to regulate research is the object of significant (and justified) non-
conformity on the part of researchers in the Social Sciences and Humanities (SSH)4,   especially against 
Resolution No. 510/2016 of the National Health Council (NHC). This resolution is the main normative 
instrument for regulating research in SSH in Brazil, although it comes from a health-related body. The 
NHC norm disregards and disrespects the particularities of the methodological responses built over the 
years in research in the SSH, marked by the development and adoption of ethical care based on the 
specificities of scientific fields. 
In addition to continuing to move the indispensable efforts to resist unfounded 
normalization, it is time for the educational field to strengthen and affirm formative proposals for the 
construction of researchers' moral autonomy as an alternative to the inadequate normative response. 
Aiming to contribute with arguments for the strengthening of a formative answer to the question of 
ethics in research, this article rescues the concept of mimesis to think about it in the scope of the 
undergraduate scientific research (USR) experience as a possible path for the moral formation of 
researchers. 
The concept of mimesis, in its etymological origin, is centered on the ideas of imitation and 
representation (Gebauer and Wulf, 2004). The idea of learning by imitation, linked or not to the concept 
of mimesis, is the subject of several researches and authors in different areas of CHS, and it is possible 
to state that there is an inseparable relationship between imitation and education in Western culture 
(Carvalho, 2019). Christoph Wulf (2016) state that the human being child or adult, learns to act in society 
mainly in a mimetic way. This learning often takes place through participation in rites and rituals in which 
knowledge is passed on in an incorporated way into action. 
In philosophy, the relationship between education and mimesis has been an object of 
reflection, at least since Ancient Greece, a period in which it was understood as a form of representation 
of nature, fundamentally linked to artistic expression, playing a leading role in the thoughts of Plato and 
Aristotle (Schlesener, 2009). To account for the purpose of this article, the theoretical framework will 
rely, above all, on the interpretations of Theodor Adorno5 and Walter Benjamin on the concept of 
mimesis. This choice is due to the fact that Adorno's work retrieves arguments from the two Greek 
philosophers mentioned and makes them more complex by combining them with analyzes from French 
ethnology and Freudian psychoanalysis, which perceived the presence of a regressive character in 
mimetic behavior. The dialogue with Walter Benjamin was fundamental for a transformation in the 
Adornian concept of mimesis (Gagnebin, 1993), which is why both authors were chosen to serve as the 
basis for the analysis proposed here, as they present complementary perspectives of approach to mimetic 
behavior that serve to think about the experience of USR. 
 
4 An overview of the conditions for approval of NHC Resolution No. 510/2016, which currently regulates the CHS, 
specifically to the area of education, see Mainardes (2017). For productions prior to the approval of this resolution, see 
(anonymity) and the book edited by Santos and Karnopp (2017).  
5 It is understood that Adorno is a relevant author to think about proliferation of norms in the moral field precisely because 
of its theoretical stance of resistance to any form of positive of ethics. In this sense, see Lastória (2001), Schweppenhäuser 
(2003) and Tiburi (2001). 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3578
 
 
 
 
 
 
In turn, the choice of USR6,  as the initial phase of the researcher's profession, was due to 
the fact that, although undergraduate students carry out research throughout the course, USR is the most 
significant instance of training in scientific research, as it is properly guided and systematically organized 
by a more experienced researcher and by experimenting in a real research environment. This statement 
is supported by the regulatory legislation of the Institutional Program for Scientific Initiation 
Scholarships (PIBIC), the oldest public policy to encourage USR still in force in Brazil and which serves 
as a base for the other types of USR. Pursuant to Normative Resolution No. 017/2006 of the National 
Council for Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq), the USR aims to “awaken a scientific 
vocation and encourage potential talent among university graduate students, through participation in a 
research project, guided by a qualified researcher” (Brazil, 2006). 
Based on the central characteristic of USR – moving training from a closer relationship 
between a qualified researcher and a research beginner – mimesis presents itself as a powerful and 
adequate theoretical category for thinking about the problem of ethical training in research, because, as 
will be argued, in this type of educational relationship, more than a mere technique, the learning of a 
practical practice in research is encouraged, which also involves ethical research. In this way, having USR 
as a stage and the category of mimesis as a theoretical construct in the elaboration of arguments, especially 
from the works of Adorno and Benjamin, it is intended to reinforce the importance of the moral 
formation of beginners in scientific practice, in a context of regulation of research. 
To achieve the announced objective, the course of the article will follow the following order: 
presentation of the construction of the concept of mimesis in the work of the chosen authors, 
justification of the applicability of the concept in USR for moral education in research, detailing of 
methodological choices, analysis of opinions of undergraduate students who had experience of USR,  
from responses to an online questionnaire designed for this study and, finally, presentation of the 
conclusions. 
 
THEORETICAL FRAME OF REFERENCE 
 
The concept of mimesis in Adorno and Benjamin 
 
The use of mimicry is not unique to human beings, there are studies within the biological 
sciences on the manifestation of this behavior in other animals (for example, flies, butterflies and snakes) 
(Futuyma, 1997; Ricklefs, 1996). Perhaps the best known case is of the chameleon that, when feeling 
threatened, changes the color of its own skin to blend in with the environment. Another form of mimetic 
behavior, present, for example, certain species of fly, is not linked to environmental imitation, but rather 
the representation of predator – an insect's attempt not to be identified as prey. In addition to the basic 
function of protecting life, mimicry appears as a form of communication and learning through imitation 
present in mammals, having been scientifically verified, at least in one species of bear, in a few primates 
(Taylor et al., 2019) and in the human being, “by far, the most qualified to learn by mimicry” (Wulf, 2016: 
555). 
For Plato (1997), the impulse to behave mimetically is irresistible to human being This 
tempting character resides in the pleasurable feeling provided by the mimetic experience, as an aesthetic 
experience of fruition and belonging to nature and the environment. By observing the surroundings to 
form images and behaviors to be imitated, the human being learns through the representation and 
internalization of these models. According to Plato (1997), this tendency towards imitation is so intense 
that it would justify the deprivation of contact with artistic production in the education of young people, 
as art is understood as an imperfect representation of reality (conceptual reason would be the privileged 
path access to true knowledge) and which, in addition, contains negative examples that could be followed 
by young people (especially referring to Greek tragedy and comedy) (Gagnebin, 1993; Wulf, 2008). 
Furthermore, Plato (1991) criticizes the passive character of mimesis, as a mere representation of what 
already exists, being stripped, in his understanding, of a creative character on the part of the subject who 
 
6 For a review of studies on USR in Brazil, see Massi and Queiroz (2010). 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3578
 
 
 
 
 
 
mimics. For these reasons, it is possible to state that Plato rejects the use of mimetic behavior as a 
resource for educating young people. 
Unlike Plato, Aristotle (2000) rehabilitates the concept and its applicability to the educational 
field, as he sees mimesis as endowed with positive stimuli to be worked on by education. He focused his 
analysis on the potential of mimetic behavior to generate learning, which is even more important than 
the object of imitation itself. Although both Greek philosophers recognize that mimesis is part of human 
nature, especially in children, Aristotle (2000) understands that this behavior does not deviate the subject 
from knowledge, on the contrary, it works as a resource that “stimulates and encourages the knowledge 
process (importance of playfulness)” (Gagnebin, 1993: 71). Aristotle (apud Carvalho, 2019: 20), thus 
shifts the analysis of mimesis (which, in Plato, was centered on the imperfection inherent in 
representation), highlighting two positive aspects: the creative potential mobilized in the subject so that 
he is able to establish a relationship of imitation and the fact that imitation is a pleasurable activity for 
human beings in general. 
Returning to Plato, Adorno starts from a first moment of criticism and refusal (especially 
present in Dialectics of Enlightenment, written with Horkheimer), and then rehabilitates the concept of 
mimesis throughout his work, namely in Negative Dialectics and, further, in Aesthetic Theory (Bassani 
and Vaz, 2011). It is important to note that, as a result of the change in the analysis of the concept, some 
commentators claim that Adorno was not able to substantiate mimesis as a theoretically consistent 
category (in this sense, see Freitas, 2001). In defense of Adorno, it is stated that there was a 
transformation of the concept throughout his work and that such change, as a whole, allows for a more 
complete analysis of mimesis, which is of interest to this article. 
For Adorno and Horkheimer (1985), the need for self-preservation of life is at the archaic 
origin of mimetic behavior. In addition, the use of mimesis worked, in the early days, as a way to allay 
the fear of the different, unknown, frightening and threatening: by imitating or acting, the subject erased 
(diminished) the difference with what caused him fear. The resort to mythology, magical rituals, dances, 
among others, served as a way to assimilate the unknown, which became less frightening when 
appropriated by different forms of language (Gagnebin, 1993). 
Adorno's theoretical rejection of this archaic moment of mimesis is due to the nullification 
of the subject's subjectivity for thoughtless incorporation into the context and to the use of non-rational 
mechanisms for mitigating fear. For Plato (1997), the use of mimicry in education puts at risk the 
construction of the laborious path of rational understanding of the world through the seduction to the 
enjoyment of nature and the arts. Along the same lines as Platonic criticism, but thinking from modernity 
onwards, Adorno and Horkheimer (1985) perceive that the first (archaic) mimesis can represent a threat 
to the process of clarifying nature based on reason. 
Like Plato, even criticizing mimetic behavior, Frankfurtian authors argue around the strong 
human inclination to its practice; more than that, Adorno recognizes the existence of an “unavoidable 
moment of mimesis that is intrinsic to all human knowledge and practice” (Adorno, 2009: 131). Given 
the inevitability of this moment, Adorno (2009) argues that the rational emancipation intended by the 
Enlightenment movement should, precisely, be built from the overcoming of this first and inherent 
mimetic contact with reality. For Adorno and Horkheimer (1985), strongly influenced by Freud (1996), 
the absence of the rational overcoming of the first mimesis would result in the risk of adopting regressive 
behaviors, among which the most serious would be the realization of a “deeply rooted tendency in the 
living being and whose overcoming is a sign of evolution: the tendency to lose oneself instead of actively 
imposing itself on the environment, the propensity to let go, to regress to nature” (Adorno and 
Horkheimer, 1985: 187). 
However, on the other hand, the excessive hardness in conducting the process of rational 
clarification and control over the mimetic impulse could determine its repression. 
 
That price is high. It could be described as the transformation of the mimesis original, 
pleasurable and threatening at the same time, into a perverse mimesis that reproduces, in the 
subject's insensitivity and stiffness, the harshness of the process he had to go through to adapt 
to the real world and, we would say with Freud, from being a child to becoming an adult. This 
second mimesis is built on the repression of the first; it characterizes the subject who managed 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3578
 
 
 
 
 
 
to resist the temptation of regression but who lost, in this struggle as necessary as fatal, the 
plasticity and exuberance of original life, when he did not lose life tout court. (Gagnebin, 1993: 
73). 
 
For this reason, Adorno and Horkheimer (1985) see education as the central dimension for 
understanding modern society, as it instrumentalists the process of clarification, especially from formal 
education institutions. For the authors, in a critical tone, “a pedagogy that makes children unaccustomed 
to being infantile – is the very condition of civilization” (Adorno and Horkheimer, 1985: 85). The modern 
educational process, instead of departing from mimesis for the construction of rationality, starts with the 
repression of mimetic behavior to control childish impulses. 
In the school phase (as it happened in the beginnings of humanity), mimetic behavior is 
fundamentally determined by physical stimuli, by physiological reactions to preserve life, in which fear 
takes a leading role and the tendency is to imitate the behavior of the fittest or dissolution in the 
environment. Adorno (1993) establishes a relationship between archaic mimicry and the permanence of 
this behavior in childhood, as a pre-conceptual phase of approximation/appropriation of the world. 
Gebauer and Wulf (2004) assert that, in Adorno, mimesis figures as a central category of the educational 
process (Bildung), constituting intersubjective in social practices, being indispensable for the creation 
and conservation of a moral action based on imitation. 
This first moment of mimesis is of fundamental importance. During this period, the family 
and the school tend to be the two main institutions responsible for introducing the world to the new 
generations, much more by example (and the environment they provide) than by word. Due to the 
absence of the worlds most structured conceptual understanding in, children appropriate reality, through 
the incorporation (and imitation) of behaviors. Rites, gestures, (re)actions, are marked in the unconscious 
of children and are carried throughout life. If the environment is one of repression of the body, mimesis 
remains in its archaic character of immediate and unstable instance, based on the fear of difference, 
which tends to generate, according to the analysis of Gagnebin (1993: 76) on Adorno, a “process social 
of perverse identification… [, in which] the individual fear of regression to the amorphous would 
engender a totalitarian collective regression, whose most complete expression is fascism”. The totalitarian 
regimes intensify the archaic fear of the different, offering as an antidote the identification with the 
charismatic leader, endowed with an easy speech that explores, precisely, superficial appropriations of 
reality. 
Benjamin (1985), in turn, took mimesis from a perspective more similar to that adopted by 
Aristotle, perceiving a (cri)active character inherent in human mimetic behavior (Gagnebin, 1993). This 
is because mimetic behavior presents elements of a knowledge relationship with the active participation 
of the subject, who needs to form an image of the environment to make it possible, rather than simply 
being able to recognize similarities, it is necessary to produce similarities (Benjamin, 1985). Indeed, the 
human being, unlike the chameleon, for example, is not able to change the color of his own skin, he 
needs to imagine the object or subject to be imitated and rationally create mechanisms that allow the 
representation. As this production does not generate perfect copies, it forces the subject to (creatively) 
fill gaps based on his subjectivity. Benjamin (1985) uses writing as an example: even writing letters, 
understood as a simple imitation task that could produce perfect copies, is impregnated with the personal 
traits of the writer. 
Imagination, as the ability to create mental images, is favored by the archaic ability to read 
“the things themselves before the word are an object of reading” (Freitas, 2008: 365). It is important to 
clarify that Benjamin uses the archaic term referring both to "the origin of humanity and history [as to] 
the period of learning the world and socialization of the child in the process of educational for adult life" 
(Schlesener, 2019: 256). In both cases, imitation is intentionally produced with a view to insertion in the 
world. 
Benjamin (1987) approaches mimesis mostly from texts about childhood (their own and in 
general), showing great concern with this stage of life for the development of rationality. Susan Buck-
Morss (1995: 288, own translation) states that "[no modern thinker, with the exception of Jean Piaget, 
has taken children more seriously in developing a theory of cognition." However, while Piaget focused 
on the gains resulting from the progressive advance of abstract thinking replacing childish thinking, 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3578
 
 
 
 
 
 
considering the use of explanations fantastic such as cognitive error, Benjamin sought to understand the 
losses resulting from the gradual abandonment of mimetic behavior by entry into adulthood (Schlesener, 
2019). 
According to Benjamin (apud Buck-Morss, 1995: 290), the loss of mimetic ability in adult 
life is determined by the loss of the ability to perceive similarities non-sensitive, understood as those that 
have no rational basis (referring to scientific rationality). Benjamin (apud Lavelle, 2014: 82) refers to 
“certain mimetic practices that characterize children's play and that would have been the foundation of 
a magical view of the world in the past”. He draws a parallel between the devaluation of mimetic behavior 
(1) throughout human history, referring to the replacement of this behavior by the inductive reasoning 
characteristic of modern science, and (2) in the individual's life, represented especially by the loss of 
capacity of imagination, so present in children's lives through play. In this relationship, the author sees 
the school as the main responsible for the suffocation of the mimetic impulse in children (Schlesener, 
2019). 
For Benjamin (1994), perceiving in things only the similarities already perceived determines 
the impoverishment of the experience. In the text: On the program of the coming philosophy (Benjamin, 
2001), the philosopher announces his project to build a concept of experience capable of including what 
he called the experience of thought. For him, the experience “[f]ormed less with isolated data and 
rigorously fixed in the memory, than with accumulated data, and often unconscious, that flow into the 
memory” (Benjamin, 1994: 103). In the text Doctrine of the similarities, which deals specifically with 
mimesis, the author reaffirms this point: 
 
Even for today's men it can be said that the episodes daily in which they consciously perceive 
the similarities are only a small fraction of the countless cases in which the similarity determines 
them, without their being aware of it. (Benjamin, 1985: 109). 
 
Following this line, Benjamin (1985) states that art is the privileged dimension for the 
occurrence of true experiences. The artist is the one who retains the ability to produce similarities non-
sensible, to see similarities where no one sees them. This idea is at the center of Aesthetic Theory 
Adorno's, apparently due to the influence of his dialogue with Benjamin (Gagnebin, 1993). Despite the 
risks pointed out by Adorno, it is clear from the Negative Dialectics and, even more, from the Aesthetic 
Theory, that the author does not condemn mimetic behavior; however, he understands that a first and 
desirable moment of mimetic approach to reality must be accompanied by the rational exercise of the 
subject: “it is neither an immediate mimesis, nor repressed mimesis, but the process it triggers and in the 
which remains modified” (Adorno, 1982: 364). 
The process triggered by the first mimesis is fundamental for the construction of moral 
behavior in Adorno. For the author, morality is based on an impulse to prevent suffering (Adorno, 2009). 
In the first moment of mimetic behavior, in which there is an indifference between the subject and 
nature, it is possible to establish feelings of contiguity, familiarity and, especially, solidarity with the 
suffering of the other: “The impulse, the naked and raw physical fear and the feeling of solidarity with 
bodies torturous, to use Brecht's expression, the impulse that is immanent to moral behavior [...]” 
(Adorno, 2009: 238). 
 
Mimesis, scientific initiation and formation of morality 
 
Considering the characteristics of USR, it is possible to affirm that it is an entry ritual into 
the academic environment. In this sense, the word itself initiation means more than simply the act of 
starting something, it also carries with it the notions that it is a rite, an experiential activity. The meaning 
of initiation, according to the Houaiss dictionary (2020), is: “The act of giving or receiving the first 
elements of a practice or the rudiments relating to an area of knowledge. Ex.: initiation scientific”. In 
USR, the student is “initiated in the science 'game' and experiences linked to a research project, designed 
and developed under the guidance of a professor” (Massi and Queiroz, 2010: 175). 
Thus, it is reasonable to state that the use of the term initiation indicates the expectation that 
USR provides broader learning than only from a theoretical point of view, having as its main foundation 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3578
 
 
 
 
 
 
the contact between an initiate and a beginner. This makes USR a privileged instance for mimetic 
learning. The applicable legislation confirms this argument and establishes the central relationship of 
USR between a “qualified researcher” (under the terms of Normative Resolution No. 017/2006) and a 
young person starting research. From a perspective of laboratory practice, Neves (2001: 84) states that 
 
[in USR,] learning takes place through observation and imitation of what the most experienced 
people do. In the field work, an intern informed me that she could only succeed in a certain 
procedure because the employee had taught her a special way to hold the scissors and that 
without it she would not be able to advance. Tacit knowledge thus accounts for a large part of 
the work in science, forcing those who wish to continue in the scientific endeavor to spend a 
good deal of time in the laboratories. 
 
This tacit knowledge, especially associated by the author with laboratory practice, tends to 
be undervalued in the context of SSH. This is mainly due to the more material character that characterizes 
research practices in the biological sciences. In this sense, learning by imitation is more evident in 
biological sciences than, in general, in SSH, characterized by research practices that refer to a merely 
rational learning, supposedly without materialization in the physical world. However, mimetic learning is 
also an important resource in the training of researchers in SSH, which is evident, for example, when a 
young student learns to conduct interviews by imitating the approach and interview techniques of a 
senior researcher. 
However, in this article, the aim is to affirm the importance of USR for mimetic learning in 
the moral field, which applies equally to science in general, with no difference between biological, SSH 
or mathematical sciences. If the correct way to hold a pair of scissors may require a theoretical 
explanation that is too abstract for a trainee, what then about understanding the metaphysical concepts 
that characterize moral thinking, and, even more challenging, the application of those concepts to 
research practice? However, in USR, it is possible for the student to visualize the application of the 
concepts of the moral field by experienced researchers, for example, in the adoption of ethical care in 
conducting a research. 
The USR experience offers a privileged opportunity to learn metaphysical concepts by 
visualizing their materialization through actions. This is very important from an educational point of 
view, because the concepts of the moral field, due to their metaphysical character, are impossible to be 
known objectively (Lavelle, 2018), imposing serious difficulties for researchers in training. In this sense, 
it is possible to affirm that USR is close to what Benjamin called experience of thought, through the 
visualization of images loaded with meaning. In this way, the USR experience allows beginners to 
visualize the researchers' moral behaviors and to form mental images of the application of ethical 
concepts in practical situations, such as taking a stand in the face of concrete ethical dilemmas. 
The formative potential of USR resides, fundamentally, in the fact that it enables the 
realization of the human tendency to learning through imitation, recognized by all authors who serve as 
the central foundation of this text. In the title Minima moralia, Adorno (1993: 147) states that “[the] 
human clings to imitation: a human being becomes truly human only when he imitates other human 
beings”. This aspect is essential to think of USR as a privileged instance for the formation of researchers' 
morality, as in which, according to Adorno (2009), the process of human formation moves by mimetic 
identification with individuals who contain the universal, in this case, humanity.  
It is important to return to one of the main controversies about the formative potential of 
mimesis, which was even at the center of the debate that was established between the conceptions of 
Plato and Aristotle, regarding a supposed passivity characteristic of mimetic learning. Affirming that USR 
favors moral learning by resorting to mimetic behavior does not mean to determine that the student will 
graduate as a senior researcher. According to Wulf (2016: 559), following in Benjamin's footsteps: 
“[i]mitate does not mean to make a copy, but to elaborate an image that certainly has a model, but does 
not copy it”. This can be explained by the individual's participation in the process of producing 
similarities by filling in gaps, as mentioned in the writing example. Thus, the educational character of 
mimesis resides in the fact that imitation is an active process of producing similarities through which the 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3578
 
 
 
 
 
 
child seeks to transport himself into the world of which he does not yet feel part (Benjamin, 1987), or, 
in the case of this text, of the young adult who intends to be initiated into the academic world: 
 
Identifying with the other, understanding him as a person who acts intentionally and, at the 
same time, paying attention to him are skills that participate in the mimetic desire of child to 
equal the adult and to resemble him, that is, to become like him. (Wulf, 2016: 555). 
 
The relationship of mimesis with education can also be thought of from the etymological 
origin of the verb to educate (e/ducare, from the Latin), as a process of leading (dúcere) the child outside 
of himself (e-ex) (Martins, 2005) and prepare her to live in the world. To that extent, the educational 
process is a driving process. 
 
[...] from the perspective of pedagogical authority it was held that the only honest and 
demonstrable license to teach is that which one possesses by virtue of example. [...] The valid 
teaching is ostensive. Show. This “ostentation”, which so intrigued Wittgenstein, is present in 
the etymology: the Latin dicere, “to show” and, only later, “to show by saying”; token and 
techen Intermediate English with their implicit "what shows" connotations. (After all, is the 
teacher a showman?) In German, deuten, which means "to point", is inseparable from bedeuten, 
"to signify". (Steiner, 1998: 13, own translation). 
 
In this teaching-showing process, this encourages the beginner to imitate the researcher, 
residing the possibility of meaningful learning, born of the desire to learn. Based on such concepts and 
arguments, the data collected will be presented below in order to perceive some impressions of CHS 
students about the USR experience. 
 
METHODOLOGICAL CHOICES 
 
This article is part of a research project started in 2016 by the Research Group (deleted to 
preserve anonymity) and its backbone is the collection of data through the application of online 
questionnaires, to SSH researchers at different stages of their academic career (senior researchers - 
represented by leaders and vice-leaders of research groups7, doctoral students8 and researchers in training 
- understood as students with USR experience), in addition to an international stage9,  seeking to produce 
knowledge about the consequences of normative interference (heteronym imposition) in the formation 
and exercise of moral autonomy of researchers. 
At this stage, seeking to represent the beginning of the researcher's profession, the possibility 
of approaching research training from the process of orientation of the end of course paper (TCC) was 
conveyed, however, USR, in most cases, precedes chronologically the orientation of the TCC, appearing 
as a first contact with the research. In addition, the guidance practice of the TCC is implemented in 
different ways in the institutions and, in general, less rigorous than the USR in terms of compliance with 
the research method and ethical procedures. In this sense, in USR, the researcher in training is integrated 
into a consolidated research, that is, they are part of a research group, dependent on funding and, 
consequently, on strict compliance with regulatory procedures, with more intense interfaces with the 
university and with society – issues that tend to be mitigated in TCCs. 
The intention of this phase of the research was to count on the answers of the USR 
scholarship holders of the Graduate Programs in Education (PPG/Edu) evaluated with grades 6 and 7 
by the Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Education Personnel (Capes). In October 2019, 
were contacted by e-mail the respective USR directorates of the universities of the three PPGs that meet 
the aforementioned criteria, headquartered in the South Region. Of the three USR directorates contacted, 
two of them responded affirmatively about sending link of the questionnaire to its students in USR 
activity, and the third did not even respond to the contact. 
 
7 Omitted for the preservation of anonymity. 
8 Omitted for the preservation of anonymity. 
9 Omitted for the preservation of anonymity.  
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3578
 
 
 
 
 
 
Although the number of respondents fell short of what was intended (26), we understand 
that the sample is sufficiently representative for the exploratory purpose of this study, in which the 
analysis of responses is complementary to the theoretical discussion. Furthermore, the questionnaires 
are comprehensive, offering data that can be analyzed compatible with the main objective of this article. 
The of the data collection instrument (questionnaire online first version) was developed in 
2016 and, since then, it has undergone minor changes in order to adapt it to the target audiences of the 
different phases of the research10, which is registered in the Scientific Committee of (omitted to preserve 
anonymity), complying with all protocols relating to research ethics. In the version used for the present 
phase of the research, the questionnaire had eight closed questions, 13 open and one using the Likert 
Intensity Scale. In order to reduce the time needed to answer the form in full, some questions regarding 
the characterization of the respondents' profile, contained in the previous phases, were suppressed. 
 
DATA 
 
From a total of 26 respondents, 46,2% (12) started their activities in the USR with less than 
20 years old, 34,6% (9) between 21 and 24 years old, 15,4% (4) between 24 and 30 years old and only 
3,8% (1) over 30 years old. Based on these data, considering that 80,5% (21) of the respondents were 
under 24 years of age when starting the USR, we can see the realization of one of the main purposes of 
the USR, which is to promote the initiation of young people in the research activity, as recommended by 
CNPq in Normative Resolution No. 017 (Brazil, 2006). 
It is interesting to note that only 7,7% (2) of beginners remained in the survey for less than 
6 months, while 65,4% (17) stayed for more than a year and 26,9% (7), between 6 months and 1 year. 
Through an open answer, 96,2% (25) positively evaluated the experience in USR and, on a scale of "1 to 
6", to quantitatively represent the dedication to activities in USR, 61,5% (16) scored "6", 30,8% (8) chose 
"5" and 7,7% (2) represented their own dedication with the number “4”. These data indicate that USR 
is a pedagogical strategy well accepted by the students, who did not spare praise when describing the 
experience: “great” (R1, R6, R7, R11); “determinant” (R3); “very good” (R4, R8, R9); “incredible” (R5); 
""rewarding" (R10); "enriching" (R12, R13); "necessary" (R15); "best choice" (R16); "contributed 
immensely" (R18); "fantastic and essential" (R22); " most impactful experience of my student life.” (R25) 
The following answer stands out: 
 
USR research is very rich for undergraduates who are beginning to enter academic research and 
also to deepen their training experience. It emphasizes the importance and complexity of 
research scientific for the construction of serious and well-founded knowledge; in addition to 
encouraging continuous study, whether in the training period or already graduated. The 
experience with USR also points to the need for dedication and a favorable environment for 
several aspects interfere in a good immersion in academic research, such as: favorable 
environment, encouragement of scholarships, dialogue between advisor and advisor, valuing 
the area of work and training, etc. (USResearcher 02, Questionnaire, 2021). 
 
The good results of USR can be understood, in part, because participation in the activity is 
an initiative of the student. It is possible to infer from the answers that 100% sought USR on their own 
initiative, with the following answer being representative: “The USR is your initiative and you need to go 
after it” (R26). 
The motivations for such decision, object of an open question, can easily be separated into 
four groups: 38,5% (10) said they were interested in the research, 26,9% (7) intended to complement the 
training, 26,9% (7) demonstrated a desire to become researchers and 7,7% (2) reported interest in 
remuneration. 
 
10 Based on this, a detailed description of the questionnaire will not be carried out, which can be found in the following 
articles: (omitted to preservation of anonymity). 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3578
 
 
 
 
 
 
It is understood that the interest in research and the intention to complement training 
(65,4%) can be grouped around the understanding that only theoretical training, a general characteristic 
of primarily expository undergraduate classes, is seen as insufficient by students. 
Regarding the 26,9% (7) who expressed the desire to become researchers, they materialize 
the mimetic desire of wanting to be a researcher (Wulf, 2016: 555). More than the scientific question, a 
fundamental aspect of the educational relationship emerges, which is the underlying human relationship. 
In this sense, one of the answers is quite significant, stating that the main motivation to perform the USR 
was the “possibility of working with Prof. [name withheld]” (R9). In the same sense  there were responses 
that affirmed as the most positive aspect of the USR the advisor: 
 
It was great, I had an incredible advisor and I realized that I love researching! (USResearcher 
01, Questionnaire, 2021). 
Every supervisor should be like mine (modesty aside). It gives us a lot of motivation for research 
and autonomy in developing it. (USResearcher 08, Questionnaire, 2021). 
 
If, on the one hand, having a good advisor, in the students' opinion, can be considered the 
most positive aspect of the USR experience, on the other hand, the opposite can also be stated. This 
reinforces the argument that mimetic experience does not generate perfect copies, but allows the 
visualization of models. To that extent, the importance of USR in the moral training of researchers 
should not be understood as necessarily positive. With Adorno (1995), it is understood that there are 
individuals who repress their mimetic stimulus to assert their rationality and, having done this to 
themselves, they feel legitimized to reproduce the same process of violence against others. This profile 
is growing in the academic environment, increasingly competitive (and sickly), and seems to be 
represented in the following answers to the question about what they liked least about USR: 
 
In my first scholarship, I shared a room with a teacher who was unnecessarily harsh with its 
fellows, demanding more hours than expected for the student's dedication. (USResearcher 05, 
Questionnaire, 2021). 
Pressure from my advisor. (USResearcher 14, Questionnaire, 2021). 
My advisor sometimes did not understand my doubts and was a little rude. (USResearcher 20, 
Questionnaire, 2021). 
 
In this line, an experienced researcher may or may not be a model to be followed. This is in 
line with the argument that mimetic behavior is not just passive, as the opportunity to visualize a model 
can move the beginner's rationality to seek personal affirmation as opposed to the model. 
Asked, with two possible answers offered, about which context the respondents considered 
to have developed more autonomy, 92,3% (24) said that in USR, and 7,7% (2) said in regular classes. 
Such percentages are consistent with the argument that creating opportunities for a model does not mean 
encouraging passive behavior on the part of students; on the contrary, the model conveys some security 
for the formation of own thought and action. Representing this understanding, when asked openly about 
the reasons why one or another instance favors autonomy more: 
 
The experience in USR was/is decisive in relation to my interest in continuing to work in the 
research. There is a lot of learning that it provides, but I feel much more autonomous and 
responsible since I started to be part of a research group. (USResearcher 03, Questionnaire, 
2021). 
I was lucky to have an advisor who was very engaged in the academic process of undergraduate 
students. It gave me autonomy to develop my own academic research, which became my TCC 
and which could have been developed even in later stages. (USResearcher 13, Questionnaire, 
2021). 
 
It is interesting to note in the answers the constant use of a material aspect in the description 
of the USR experience, which can be understood along the lines of what Benjamin (1985) understands 
as the formation of mental images, linked to the human tendency to read the world first by the images. 
In this sense, the respondents used verbs that refer to the senses, such as seeing and looking, and words 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3578
 
 
 
 
 
 
that materialize concepts, such as distancing, which characterize mimetic learning as one that is 
experienced throughout the body (senses and reason): 
 
In the room the teacher tells me what I have to do and how to do it. Scientific initiation taught 
me to try new methods, in which I could myself see directly within the research, the advisor 
supports me and always helps me with any questions I have, but the path and each step new 
to take comes from me, and the classroom doesn't give me that. (USResearcher 23, 
Questionnaire, 2021, emphasis added by the authors). 
My greatest learning was the look of a researcher. (USResearcher 14, Questionnaire, 2021. 
emphasis added by the authors). 
In regular classes I found a great distance between teachers and the training process of students. 
(USResearcher 13, Questionnaire, 2021, emphasis added by the authors). 
 
To that extent, the answers corroborate the understanding that the aesthetic aspect of the 
USR experience, as an instance of training that enables mimetic learning, favors the understanding of 
abstract concepts, such as those that characterize the field of foundation of moral behavior. The tension 
between theory and practice in USR, especially in the moral field, can be evidenced by the expressive 
percentage of 73,1% (19) of respondents who said they had already experienced an ethical dilemma in 
the research, contrasting with 80,5% (21) who admitted that they were not sufficiently familiar with 
Resolution NHC No. 510 (Brasil, 2016). In other words, students were able to recognize an ethical 
dilemma, despite their little knowledge of the applicable standard. 
And this is even more important given the percentage of only 23,1% of respondents who 
claimed to have attended a course on ethics in graduation. On the other hand (and perhaps as a result of 
this training lapse), in the following question, only 23,1% said they did not look for alternative ways to 
deepen their knowledge about ethics. 
Based on the percentages presented, it is possible to affirm the importance of USR as a tool 
for the formation of researchers' morality. However, this instrument is currently little and poorly used in 
Brazil, which is evidenced by the percentage of 50% of the respondents who, in some way, made 
reference to the little appreciation of the research activity carried out by the students. Among the 
evidences of devaluation, the reference to the scholarship value, of R$ 400.0011  per 20 hours of research 
per week was the main issue mentioned by the respondents. It is worth noting that the value of the 
scholarship has not changed since 2012 and that the USR programs are being subject to a significant 
reduction in the number of scholarships, in the current context of retraction in funding for education 
and science in Brazil. 
 
FINAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 
Based on the theoretical arguments and data presented, it is possible to affirm that mimetic 
behavior is at the center of the experience provided by USR and, to that extent it can be an important 
resource to be mobilized for the moral formation of subjects. In line with Benjamin's (1985) argument, 
this resource is capable of mobilizing the aesthetic dimension, as necessary as it is mistreated in the 
context of formal education, and acquires even more relevance in a context of proliferation of control 
norms, often alien to interests and needs of the CHS field. 
However, following Adorno (1982, 2009), it is important to consider that the use of mimetic 
behavior is necessary, but not sufficient, and should be combined with the development of students' 
conceptual reasoning skills, only accessible through adequate and guided theoretical reflection. The 
mimetic stimulus is an excellent instance of sensitization, but it needs to be accompanied by a rational 
effort by the subject, under penalty of transmitting the idea as naive as it is dangerous that the foundation 
of the moral field is simplistic. This warning is especially necessary in a context in which self-proclaimed 
norms of abound codes of ethics, which hide control interests over scientific activity and norms that 
intend to regulate research. 
 
11 Equivalent to EUR 62,50 at the commercial exchange rate of September 3, 2020. 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3578
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thus, the best path seems to be a balanced training between mimetic stimuli and the 
development of theoretical reasoning, as the excess of the discursive transmission route through lectures 
is pointed out, even by the questionnaire respondents, as insufficient to enable training proper. Finally, 
it is understood that the relationship established between researcher and beginner in USR has 
characteristics that foster a mimetic relationship between them and, to that extent, can function as a 
powerful instance of moral training in research, efficient and legitimate, as it is produced a on the research 
practice in the respective area, more authentic than the simple recourse to external standardization. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Adorno, Theodor W. (1982). Teoria estética. Lisboa: Edições 70. Tradução de Artur Morão. Adorno, 
Theodor W. (1993), Minima moralia. São Paulo: Ática. 
 
Adorno, Theodor W. (1995). Educação e emancipação. Rio de Janeiro: Paz e Terra. Adorno, Theodor W. 
(2009), Dialética negativa. Rio de Janeiro: Zahar. 
 
Adorno, Theodor W.; Horkheimer, Max (1985). Dialética do esclarecimento. Rio de Janeiro: Zahar. Tradução 
de Guido Antonio de Almeida. 
 
Aristóteles (2000). Poética. São Paulo: Nova Cultural. (Col. Os Pensadores). Tradução de Baby Abrão. 
 
Bassani, Jaison José; Vaz, Alexandre Fernandez (2011). Mimesis e rememoração da natureza no sujeito 
em Theodor W. Adorno: para pensar a educação do corpo na escola, Pro-Posições, 22(1), 151-165. 
 
Benjamin, Walter (1985). Obras escolhidas: magia e técnica, arte e política (v. I). São Paulo: Brasiliense. 
 
Benjamin, Walter (1987). Infância em Berlim por volta de 1900, in Walter Benjamin, Obras escolhidas (v. 
II). São Paulo: Brasiliense, 71-142. 
 
Benjamin, Walter (1994). Obras escolhidas: Charles Baudelaire: um lírico no auge do capitalismo (v. III). 
São Paulo: Brasiliense. 
 
Benjamin, Walter (2001). Sobre el programa de la filosofía venidera, in Para una crítica de la violencia y otros 
ensaios (3. ed.). Madrid: Taurus Humanidades. 
 
Brasil (2006). Resolução Normativa nº 017, de 6 de julho de 2006. Brasília: Conselho Nacional de 
Desenvolvimento 
Científico 
e 
Tecnológico 
(CNPq). 
Consultado 
a 
13.09.2020, 
em: 
http://cnpq.br/view/-/journal_content/56_INSTANCE_0oED/10157/100352. 
 
Brasil (2016). Resolução nº 510, de 7 de abril de 2016. Brasília: Conselho Nacional de Saúde (CNS). 
Consultado 
a 
13.09.2020, 
em: 
https://bvsms.saude.gov.br/bvs/saudelegis/cns/2016/res0510_07_04_2016.html 
 
Buck-Morss, Susan (1995). Dialéctica de la mirada: Walter Benjamin y el proyecto de los Pasajes. Madrid: 
La balsa de la medusa. Tradução de N. Rabotnikof. 
 
Carvalho, Isabel Cristina de Moura; Machado, Frederico Viana (2014). A regulação da pesquisa e o campo 
biomédico: considerações sobre um debate epistêmico desde o campo da educação, Práxis Educativa, 
9(1), 209-234. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5212/PraxEduc.v.9i1.0010. 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3578
 
 
 
 
 
 
Carvalho, Marcus Vinicius Corrêa (2019). Mimese: sobre processos de conhecimento, representação 
artística e formação na história da educação, Educar em Revista, 35(73), 15- 31. DOI: 10.1590/0104-
4060.62733 
 
Freitas, Nivaldo Alexandre de (2008). Psicanálise e mímesis com base na teoria crítica, in Anais do IV 
Encontro de História da Arte. Ribeirão Preto, Brasil. Consultado a 13.09.2020, em: 
https://www.ifch.unicamp.br/eha/atas/2008/DE%20FREITAS,%20Nivaldo%20Alexandre% 
20-%20IVEHA.pdf 
 
Freitas, Verlaine (2001). Para uma dialética da alteridade: a constituição mimética do sujeito, da razão e do 
tempo em TW Adorno. Belo Horizonte: FAFICH/UFMG. 
 
Freud, Sigmund (1996). O mal-estar na civilização. Obras psicológicas completas de Sigmund Freud: edição 
standard brasileira. Rio de Janeiro: Imago. 
 
Futuyma, Douglas J. (1997). Biologia evolutiva (2. ed). Ribeirão Preto: Ed. SBG. 
 
Gagnebin, Jeanne-Marie (1993). Do conceito de mímesis no pensamento de Adorno e Benjamin, 
Perspectivas, 16, 67-86. 
 
Gebauer, Günter; Wulf, Christoph (2004). Mimese na cultura: agir social, rituais e jogos, produções estéticas. 
São Paulo: Annablume. 
 
Houaiss, A. (2020). Dicionário eletrônico da língua portuguesa. Consultado a 13.09.2020, em: 
https://houaiss.uol.com.br/pub/apps/www/v5-4/html/index.php#3 
 
Israel, Mark; Hay, Iain (2006). Research Ethics for Social Scientists: Between ethical conduct and regulatory 
compliance. Londres: Sage. 
 
Lastória, Luiz A. Calmon Nabuco (2001). Ethos sem ética: a perspectiva crítica de TW Adorno e M. 
Horkheimer, 
Educação 
e 
Sociedade, 
22(76), 
63-75. 
Consultado 
a 
13.09.2020, 
https://www.scielo.br/pdf/es/v22n76/a04v2276.pdf. 
 
Lavelle, Patrícia (2014). Mímesis e enigma: sobre infância em Berlim por volta de 1900, Revista Poiésis, 24, 
77-92. 
 
Lavelle, Patrícia (2018), Literatura, reflexão e semelhança: uma afinidade entre Benjamin e Ricoeur, 
Kriterion, 139, 235-253. 
 
Mainardes, Jefferson (2017). A ética na pesquisa em educação: panorama e desafios pós Resolução CNS 
nº 510/2016, Educação, 40(2), 160-173. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15448/1981-2582.2017.2.26878 
 
Martins, Evandro Silva (2005). A etimologia de alguns vocábulos referentes à educação, Olhares e trilhas, 
6, 31-36. 
 
Massi, Luciana; Queiroz, Salete Linhares (2010). Estudos sobre iniciação científica no Brasil: uma revisão, 
Cadernos de Pesquisa, 40(139), 173-197. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1590/S0100- 15742010000100009 
 
Neves, Rosa Maria Corrêa das (2001). Lições da iniciação científica ou a pedagogia do laboratório, 
História, Ciências, Saúde, 3, 71-97. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1590/S0104- 59702001000200004 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3578
 
 
 
 
 
 
Platão (1991). Diálogos de Platão: seleção de textos de José Américo Motta Pessanha (5. ed.). São Paulo: 
Nova Cultural. (Col. Os Pensadores). Tradução e notas de José Cavalcante de Souza, Jorge Paleikat 
e João Cruz Costa. 
 
Platão (1997). A República. São Paulo: Nova Cultural. Tradução de Enrico Corvisieri. 
 
Ricklefs, Robert E. (1996). A economia da natureza (3. ed.). Rio de Janeiro: Guanabara Koogan. 
 
Santos, Luis Henrique Sachi; Karnopp, Lodenir Becker (Orgs.) (2017). Ética e pesquisa em educação: questões 
e proposições às ciências humanas e sociais. Porto Alegre: UFRGS. 
 
Schlesener, Anita Helena (2009). Mímesis e infância: observações acerca da educação a partir de Walter 
Benjamin, Filosofia Unisinos, 10(2), 148-156. DOI: 10.4013/fsu.2009.102.02 
 
Schlesener, Anita Helena (2019). Mosaicos, colagens, desvios, passagens: a educação a partir de Walter Benjamin. 
Curitiba: UTP. 
 
Schweppenhäuser, Gerhard (2003). A filosofia moral negativa de Theodor W. Adorno, Educação e 
Sociedade, 
24(83), 
391-415. 
Consultado 
a 
13.09.2020, 
em: 
https://www.scielo.br/pdf/es/v24n83/a04v2483.pdf. 
 
Steiner, George (1998). Lecciones de los maestros. Madrid: Siruela. 
 
Taylor, Derry et al. (2019). Facial complexity in sun bears: exact facial mimicry and social sensitivity, 
Scientific Reports, 9(4961).DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-39932-6 
 
Tiburi, Márcia (2001). Adorno e a impossibilidade da ética, in Luiz A. Calmon Nabuco Lastória et al. 
(Org.), Teoria crítica, ética e educação. Piracicaba/Campinas: Editora da UNIMEP/Autores Associados, 
85-104. 
 
Wulf, Christoph (2008). Antropología: historia, cultura e filosofía. Rubí, Barcelona: Anthropos Editorial. 
Tradução de Daniel Barreto González. 
 
Wulf, Christoph (2016). Aprendizagem cultural e mimese: jogos, rituais e gestos, Revista Brasileira de 
Educação, 21(66), 553-568. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1590/S1413- 24782016216629   
 
 
AUTHORSHIP STATEMENT 
 
Pedro Savi Neto – Conceptualization, Investigation, Writing – original draft.  
Inês Nascimento – Data curation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing.  
Mónica de la Fare – Project administration, Methodology, Writing – review & editing. 
  
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS 
 
The authors have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could 
have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
This article  was  funded  by  the Coordenação  de  Aperfeiçoamento  de  Pessoal  de  Nível 
Superior(CAPES, Brazil) (Finance Code 001), with a PNPD grant for the first author. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3578
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.3578
This preprint was submitted under the following conditions: 
The authors declare that they are aware that they are solely responsible for the content of the preprint and
that the deposit in SciELO Preprints does not mean any commitment on the part of SciELO, except its
preservation and dissemination.
The authors declare that the necessary Terms of Free and Informed Consent of participants or patients in
the research were obtained and are described in the manuscript, when applicable.
The authors declare that the preparation of the manuscript followed the ethical norms of scientific
communication.
The authors declare that the data, applications, and other content underlying the manuscript are
referenced.
The deposited manuscript is in PDF format.
The authors declare that the research that originated the manuscript followed good ethical practices and
that the necessary approvals from research ethics committees, when applicable, are described in the
manuscript.
The authors declare that once a manuscript is posted on the SciELO Preprints server, it can only be taken
down on request to the SciELO Preprints server Editorial Secretariat, who will post a retraction notice in its
place.
The authors agree that the approved manuscript will be made available under a Creative Commons CC-BY
license.
The submitting author declares that the contributions of all authors and conflict of interest statement are
included explicitly and in specific sections of the manuscript.
The authors declare that the manuscript was not deposited and/or previously made available on another
preprint server or published by a journal.
If the manuscript is being reviewed or being prepared for publishing but not yet published by a journal, the
authors declare that they have received authorization from the journal to make this deposit.
The submitting author declares that all authors of the manuscript agree with the submission to SciELO
Preprints.
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
