Biological collections are of extreme importance in acquiring knowledge of the biodiversity of a specific environment. In this article, we organise, list and catalogue the adult specimens belonging to the family Culicidae housed in the Parasitology Collection of the Basic Pathology Department at the Federal University of Paraná, southern Brazil. To this end, a data bank was created, containing information on the taxonomy and collecting of each sample. The culicids were collected using different methodologies in 18 municipalities in the state of Paraná, between 1967 and 1999. There are 5,739 catalogued specimens of which 4,704 (81.96%) are identified at a specific level, with a diversity of 205 species. Of these, 18 are new recorded samples for the state of Paraná and 3 for Brazil. This being the case, we propose, in honour of the 30 years dedicated to the study of culicids in the state of Paraná, the creation of the Ana Leuch Lozovei Entomological Collection, which is composed of insect vectors or potential vectors, of agents that cause diseases in humans.
The Parasitology Collection of the Basic Pathology Department, housed in the Biological Science Sector of the Federal University of Paraná (ColPar/DPAT/BL/UFPR), was set up in the 1960s through different research projects. One of researchers who contributed to this initiative was Professor and Doctor Ana Leuch Lozovei, who, with her students and collaborators, collected and identified the different taxonomic groups found there. The collection includes some insect vector families, notably the family Culicidae, comprising specimens captured in different municipalities in the state of Paraná, in southern Brazil, between 1967 and 1999.
Professor Ana Leuch Lozovei was a member of the teaching staff and taught Parasitology and Medical Entomology in the Basic Pathology Department of the Federal University of Paraná. She contributed significantly to the training of several generations of health, Natural Sciences and education professionals working throughout Brazil today. Driven by a sharp intuition, she built collections of diverse taxonomic groups, with a view to utilizing them didactically. However, after the years of work and contributions of her post-graduate students, the material increasingly gained scientific dimension as the knowledge of the areas in which she worked increased. This was how the Culicidae section of her collection began to occupy a place of great distinction for knowledge of entomofauna of medical importance and of the ecological aspects of these insects in the areas studied, with special care in identification, organisation and conservation. These samples afforded the Basic Pathology Department the construction of a valuable legacy that highlights the importance of the collection to its creator and to the state of Paraná. It reflects a life dedicated to knowledge. Professor Ana Leuch Lozovei is now retired, but, those who meet her describe the same sensation as that in the times when she taught in the department: “It`s impossible to leave the classroom with a question unanswered, always motivated to be curious”. The Professor Ana Leuch Lozovei Collection, which has incredible growth potential thanks to its importance, is able to serve as a reference source for researchers interested in the culicid fauna of Paraná. The collecting of samples aimed for knowledge of the diversity of species and the ecological aspects of Culicidae, in addition to specifying the species as potentially medical and veterinary in the areas studied. But more specifically, Dr. Ana Lozovei and her collaborators intended to map species distribution and contribute with advances in medical entomology in the state of Paraná.
To honour the contribution of this researcher, who spent more than 30 years studying the family Culicidae, we propose in this article to create the Ana Leuch Lozovei Entomological Collection which is an integral part of ColPar/DPAT/BL/UFPR.
The collection boasts a total of 5,739 specimens, represented by 2 subfamilies of Culicidae, with 7 tribes, 23 genera, 37 subgenera and 205 species. A total of 943 individuals (16.43%) are identified only at subgenus level and 93 (1.62%) at genus level. Among the individuals identified at a specific level, 4,704 (81.96%), 18 species constitute the first recorded sample for the state of Paraná (Anopheles albimanus Wiedmann, 1820, Anopheles costai da Fonseca & da Silva Ramos, 1940, Anopheles rangeli Gabaldon, Cova-Garcia & Lopez, 1940, Culex aquarius Strickman, 1990, Culex bastagarius Dyar & Knab, 1906, Culex foliaceus Lane, 1945, Culex alinkios Sallum & Hutchings, 2003, Culex faurani Duret, 1968, Culex lucifugus Komp, 1936, Culex hedys Root, 1927, Culex ocossa Dyar & Knab, 1919, Culex oedipus Root, 1927, Culex lanei Oliveira Coutinho & Forattini, 1962, Aedes fulvithorax (Lutz, 1904), Culex theobaldi (Lutz, 1904), Culex pleuristriatus Theobald, 1903, Aedes eucephalaeus (Dyar, 1918) and Uranotaenia ditaenionota Prado, 1931). Three of these are new recorded samples for Brazil (Culex aquarius, Culex lucifugus and Aedes eucephalaeus), which signifies the expansion of geographical distribution of the species previously restricted to certain locations or countries.
Capturing the culicids was carried out in nature reserves in 18 municipalities (Figure 1) in the state of Paraná between 1967 and 1999. The Dense Ombrophilous Forest phytogeographic region is represented in the collection as the area that contains the majority of samples (n= 4,831) with the municipality of Morretes having 4,774 (98%) recorded samples. In fact, this region has been used as a collection place for culicids by different researchers, bearing in mind the availability of conservation areas in the region. [1–4]. Throughout the 30 years of study, identifications were carried out and confirmed by taxonomists in the group, including Dr. Ana Lozovei, as well such collaborators as Dr. Samira Chahad-Ehlers, Dr. Luiz Gonzaga dos Santos-Neto and Dr. Adson Luís Sant’Ana, who are three of the co-authors of this article. Some identifications were confirmed at the time by Dr. Maria Anice Mureb Sallum of the Public Health Faculty of the University of São Paulo. The Parasitology Collection of the Basic Pathology Department is part of the Information System on Brazilian Diversity (SiBBr) and can be accessed on https://collectory.sibbr.gov.br/collectory/public/show/co446.
Biodiversity is a world heritage and must be valued for the development of each nation. Similarly, national scientific collections must be seen as the memorial heritage of the country’s diversity [5–7], since they are temporary records of the diversity of the organisms in an environment. Furthermore, biological collections are of extreme importance to science, given that their data allow for strategic research of the country and are of enormous value in complying with international commitments and treaties [5,8,9]. Their use in research is essential for any researcher in need of reference to a currently recognized name and other information related to any taxon of interest [10,11].
Insects of the family Culicidae (order Diptera), commonly known as mosquitoes, have a wide geographic distribution. There are currently 3,591 described species, divided into two subfamilies (Anophelinae and Culicinae), distributed in 113 genera [12] with around 31% found in the Neotropical region [13,14]. There are 530 recorded species in Brazil, belonging to 23 genera distributed throughout all biomes and six of these are endemic to the country [16]. There are currently 191 culicidae species in the state of Paraná [17–19], though these numbers show a tendency to increase with the intensification of research due to the epidemiological importance of this group. [20,21].
Bearing in mind the relevance of culicids to diverse areas of natural and applied sciences and the importance of biological collections as a source of conservation of biodiversity data, it is thus essential that all information about this insect should be published, shared and made available to the entire general and scientific community. Thus, the data collection on culicids and cataloguing of the Ana Leuch Lozovei Entomological Collection at ColPar/DPAT/BL/UFPR, has led to a repository of information on the culicid fauna of some phytogeographic regions in the state of Paraná. The collection presents important potential for the utilisation of data and such information as knowledge of the entomofauna of places that were not degraded at one time or to reveal species that are currently difficult to collect in the state, so contributing to future studies of the fauna and environmental conservation. The subfamily Culicinae represents the major part of the present species and the genus Culex presented the highest number of specimens in the collection, corresponding to around 40% of the total, distributed among 52 species, making it the most diverse. By contrast, the genera Aedeomyia, Lutzia, Onirion and Shannoniana are the least represented, with just one species each. As for Anophelinae, there are two recorded genera, namely Anopheles, represented by 30 species, and Chagasia, with just one. The period of 30 years spent on study furnishes a timeframe for one to understand the dynamics of population fluctuation or the detection of species not previously recorded, enabling the generation of data on areas of epidemiological potential for diseases related to culicids [22].
These mosquitoes represent an important link in the transmission chain of many neglected, emerging and re-emerging diseases [22–24]. The collection boasts samples of diverse species of great medical importance (Table 1), for example, Aedes (Stegomyia) albopictus (Skuse, 1895) and Aedes (Stegomyia) aegypti (Linnaeus, 1762), considered to be the main vectors of Dengue (DENV), Zika Virus (ZIKV), and Chikungunya (CHIKV). Aedes aegypti is also an important element in the transmission of Yellow Fever (YFV) in the urban environment [25,26]. The species Haemagogus (Conopostegus) leucocelaenus (Dyar & Shannon, 1924) and Aedes (Ochlerotatus) fulvus (Wiedemann, 1828), included in the Aedini tribe, are also associated with yellow fever, but in forested environments [27,28]. In recent laboratory research, Lourenço-de-Oliveira and Failoux [29] observed the vectorial competence of the species Hg. leucocelaenus and Aedes (Protomacleaya) terrens (Walker, 1856) for the Chikungunya virus, noting that both can transmit this virus. Furthermore, the genus Culex is an important group in the transmission of Wuchereria bancrofti (lymphatic filariasis), encephalitis, and such serious haemorrhagic fevers as Oropouche fever [30–32], while the genus Anopheles is the one most responsible for the transmission Plasmodium spp., which cause human malaria [33–36]. In addition to the importance for public health, culicids participate effectively in the transmission of diverse pathogens that cause diseases of veterinary interest, some of which, such as Equine Infectious Anaemia (EIA), dirofilariasis and West Nile fever [37–41], have zoonotic potential, reaffirming the importance that culicids have in the epidemiological chain of diseases transmitted by vectors [21,42,43].
The state of Paraná, situated in the subtropical region of South America, in southern Brazil, between the coordinates 22°30’44” S – 26°43’08” S and 48°00’11” W – 54°36’32” W, has a territorial area of 199,298 km² [44], composed of five phytogeographic regions: Seasonal Semideciduous Forest, Mixed Ombrophilous Forest, Dense Ombrophilous Forest, Steppe and Savanna [45,46]. According to the Köppen classification, the state’s climate is divided into subtropical and tropical, with an average annual temperature of 19°C, varying between 25.9 and 12°C and average annual precipitation of 1,300 mm [47].
The geographical coordinates of the 18 sample municipalities were extracted from the platform Global Gazetteer Version 2.3 (http://www.fallingrain.com/world/.). These data were the basis for the devising of a map covering the phytogeographic areas [46], utilising QGis software (V. 3.22.3-Białowieża). The culicids in the collection were captured by different methods, such as entomological nets, aspiration, light traps (CDC) and Shannon traps containing a fluorescent bulb as bait. [1,2,17].
The cataloguing work was carried out at the Parasitology Collection in the Basic Pathology Department located in the Biological Sciences Sector of the Federal University of Paraná (UFPR), where Culicidae specimens collected by Dr. Ana Leuch Lozovei, her students and collaborators can be found. The classification utilised for Culicidae follows the system proposed by Harbach [12], Wilkerson et al. [13] for the tribe Aedini, with abbreviations according to Reinert [48].
Only information on dry preserved male and female culicids, mounted with entomological pins was used for the DataSet. Data on each individual were tabulated on a spreadsheet using Microsoft Office® v. 2016 (Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, WA, USA) and later transferred to a Darwin Core spreadsheet. [49].
Throughout the years of dedicated to research into culicid fauna in the state of Paraná, several works were published by Dr. Ana Leuch Lozovei and her group, [2,3,17,34,50–52], reinforcing the importance of culicids in the transmission of diseases and in environmental quality. Moreover, it was possible to carry out this work through the data obtained.
Climatic alterations with constant modifications in the environment over time promote significant changes in biodiversity, above all in the insect population, where one can observe a greater dispersion in the environment, mainly of those species of medical/epidemiological interest. The data made available in this work could be fundamental in future studies on aspects regarding ecology, the environment and biodiversity, principally of the species of medical interest from the perspective of “One Health”. An important point concerning the current collection is that it represents 18 new first recorded samples of species for the state of Paraná, serving as an important reference for research into the biodiversity of mosquitoes. This demonstrates and reaffirms the importance of maintaining and constantly updating biological collections.
We would like to thank Clara Baringo Fonseca for her help in the preparation of the Darwin Core spreadsheet; Dr. Maria Anice Mureb Sallum of the Faculty of Public Health, University of São Paulo, for the identification of some samples of the culicids in the collection. We would also like to thank the municipalities and institutions for their contributions which enabled the sample collecting to be carried out at the time, and thanks also to Dr. Ueslei Teodoro of the State University of Maringá and Dr. Mara Cristina Pinto of the State University of São Paulo (UNESP, Araraquara), for the field support received at the time.