São Paulo city stands as the epicenter of the outbreak sparked by SARS-Cov-2 in Latin 
America. On July 2nd there were 134,984 confirmed COVID-19 cases and 7,370 deaths, 
roughly 10% of confirmed cases and deaths in Brazil1. São Paulo city is composed of 5 
regions (North, East, South, Midwest and Southeast), each with unique socioeconomic 
and epidemiological characteristics. 

São Paulo health systems are currently being challenged in the attempt to control 
transmission of SARS-CoV-2 while providing adequate care in particular to a subset of 
infected patients with severe disease. In Brazil it has been observed that among deaths 
due to COVID-19, 69% were 60 years or older, and 63% had at least one of the 
identified clinical risk factors for severe disease, amongst which the most prevalent 
were cardiovascular disease and diabetes2. As part of response planning it becomes of 
utmost importance to identify segments of the population who may be at risk for severe 
COVID-19 and describe their sociodemographic characteristics and how they are 
geographically distributed.  

The scientific community has been calling attention to the disproportionate impact of 
the pandemic among the population subgroups of lower socioeconomic status3. In this 
study we estimated the prevalence of risk factors for severe COVID-19 living in São 
Paulo city by sociodemographic characteristics based on routinely collected public 
health data. 

We retrieved data from the most recent household-based survey conducted in São 
Paulo, ISA Capital 2015, which collected information from a representative sample of 
non-institutionalized residents. ISA-Capital 2015 collected respondents’ self-reported 
health conditions, weight and height, smoking habit, among other information. The 
survey was based on probabilistic sample. Two-stage sampling was done within census 
tracts (primary sampling unit) and households (second stage). A total of 4,043 
respondents were interviewed. Data were collected through a structured questionnaire 
with mostly closed questions. The design, characteristics, and questionnaires of ISA-
Capital 
2015 
have 
been 
described 
in 
detail 
in: 
https://www.prefeitura.sp.gov.br/cidade/secretarias/saude/epidemiologia_e_informacao/
isacapitalsp/. 

In our analysis we included risk factors for severe disease described in the literature and 
other reliable public health resources4 which were available in ISA-Capital survey. 
From the total of people interviewed we included data from 3,223 adults (≥18 years) for 
whom information on chronic diseases and lifestyle risk factors was available. Criteria 
for risk for severe disease included people aged ≥65 years or with a diagnosis of 
cardiovascular disease, diabetes, chronic respiratory disease, hypertension, (current) 
cancer, history of stroke, obesity (BMI ≥30 kg/m2), current smoking, or moderate to 
severe asthma (defined as asthma that moderately/severely limits daily activities as per 
respondents). We estimated the prevalence of one or more risk factors for severe 
COVID-19 by sex, age, education, income, race/ethnicity and São Paulo city region.  
All statistical analyses considered ISA complex multistage sampling design and were 
carried out using Stata 15.0 software (StataCorp, TX, USA). 

Participants included in our study were 47% were men, 66% had at least secondary 
education, 51% were white, and 54% lived on less than a minimal wage per capita.  

Prevalence of single risk factors for severe COVID-19 among older adults ≥65 years 
were as high as 58% (hypertension), while for younger adults (<65 years) obesity was 
the most prevalent risk factor (21%). In general, risk factors were more prevalent among 
older adults with two exceptions: obesity and smoking were more prevalent in younger 
adults (data not shown). 

The prevalence of one or more risk factors for severe COVID-19 was 56.4% (4.7 
million) in the city of São Paulo (Table 1). The proportion was higher in adults <65 
years old (51%) vs. in the older adults (80%). Among less educated adults, that is, those 
who had no formal education reported, 86% had at least 1 risk factor for severe 
COVID-19, as compared to 49% among those with university education initiated. 
Distribution of risk factors was similar according to income or race (Figure 1). 

Southeast (59.8%), North (58.7%) and South (56%) had higher prevalence of one or 
more risk factors, while in the Midwest it was relatively lower (53.8%) (Table 1), 
despite the high proportion of adults ≥65 years (data not shown). 

We found that more than half of the population, and hence a large number of adults, 
presented with at least one risk factor for severe COVID-19 in the city of São Paulo, 
including under the age of 65 years. A similar estimate for worldwide risk for severe 
disease pointed out to a fifth of the population, but is likely to be underestimated, since 
the calculation did not include obesity, a highly prevalent risk factor globally5.  

We also described how the prevalence of risk factors is unequally distributed across São 
Paulo city: in the North and Southeast these risk factors were more prevalent, which 
may partially explain the higher deaths rates, alongside with inequalities in resources for 
care, particularly in the North. Subgroups of the population with lower education rates, a 
robust indicator of lower socioeconomic status, had higher prevalence of risk factors for 
severe disease. Data analysis of the first weeks of the pandemic in the city of São Paulo 
pointed out to a concentration of COVID-19 cases in the Midwest and Southeast 
regions, while COVID-19 deaths concentrate in the North, Southeast and East regions6. 
probably also reflecting disparities in accessing the necessary health services.  

As part of an effective COVID-19 response it is important to describe the distribution of 
risk factors for severe disease in the population in order to identify vulnerabilities and 
tailor prevention and care strategies. 

The present study has limitations. Risk factors were self-reported and therefore prone to 
misclassification bias. In addition, ISA-Capital dates from 2015, and other risk factors 
(known and unknown) were not captured. Nevertheless, our findings contribute to a 
better understanding of the greater impact of COVID-19 in lower-resource settings and 
population subgroups. Response strategies will need to be tailored to address such 
vulnerabilities.   
