Ceramics  of (1−x)Ba(Zr 0.2 Ti 0.8 )O 3 –x(Ba 0.7 Ca 0.3 )TiO 3  (BZT-BCT) are  one  of  the 
promising  candidates  to  substitute  the  lead  zirconate  titanate  (PZT)  ceramics.  Some  authors 
have  named  these  compositions  as Ba 1-x Ca x Ti 1-y Zr y O 3  ( BCZT ) while  others  as  BZT-BCT.  That 
way,  this  terminology  can  lead  the  interpretation  that  ceramics  of  BCZT  were  prepared  from 
precursor  powders  ``direct  route”  (carbonates,  oxides,  etc),  while  ceramics  of  BZT-BCT  are 
synthesized  by  the  mixture  of  BZT  and  BCT  solid  solutions  in  a  “composite  route.” 
Therefore,  this  paper  aims  to  put  light  into  the  influence  of  the  processing  route  on  the 
properties  of  these  compositions.  The  method  used  was  the  preparation  of  the  ceramics  by 
two  routes:  BCZT,  named  as  a  monophasic  system,  prepared  by  the  direct  route  and 
BZT-BCT,  designed  polyphasic  system,  prepared  by  a  composite  route.  The  results  show  that 
the  processing  influences  the  structure,  microstructure,  dielectric  properties,  and  phase 
transitions  of  the  ceramics.  These  findings  are  particularly  relevant  for  the  discussion  of  the 
phase   development   and   compositional   complexity   of   these   materials.  

Ceramics  with  piezoelectric  properties  are  applied  as  sensors,  actuators,  and  transducers 
[1].  Traditionally,  high  piezoelectric  coefficients  are  obtained  in  Lead  zirconate  titanate  (PZT) 
based  ceramics  [2,  3].  However,  due  to  the  toxicity  of  lead,  researches  have  been  performed  to 
obtain   lead-free   ceramics   with   piezoelectric   properties   similar   to   PZT   [1,   4].   

In  2009  Liu  and  Ren  published  a  paper  about  a  ceramic  system  with  excellent 
piezoelectric  properties  [2].  This  paper  discusses  the  case  of  one  composition  close  to  the 
morphotropic  phase  boundary,  defined  as  Ba(Zr 0.2 Ti 0.8 )O 3 –x(Ba 0.7 Ca 0.3 )TiO 3 .  According  to 
these  authors,  the  material  was  produced  through  a  pseudo-binary  system,  called  BZT-xBCT, 
where  x  is  the  molar  percent  of  BCT.  Since  then,  many  works  have  been  performed  to 
understand  the  mechanism  that  explains  the  high  piezoelectric  values  of  these  compositions 
[5,  6,  7].  Nevertheless,  the  literature  has  reporting  works  with  the  composition 
(1-x)Ba(Zr 0.2 Ti 0.8 )O 3 –x(Ba 0.7 Ca 0.3 )TiO 3 using  two  definitions,  BCZT  with  a  direct  formulations 
(Ba 0.85 Ca 0.15 )(Zr 0.1 Ti 0.9 )O 3 [8,  9,  10]  and  BZT-BCT  with  a  composite  formulations 
(0.5BaTi 0.8 Zr 0.2 O 3 -0.5Ba 0.7 Ca 0.3 TiO 3 )  [11,  12,  13].  These  different  definitions  referred  to  the 
same   atomic   composition.  

The  compositions  of  BCZT  have  attracted  the  attention  of  researchers  due  to  its  high 
piezoelectric  coefficients  [9].  However,  these  coefficients  are  observed  only  in  a  small 
temperature  range  due  to  the  phase  transitions  of  the  ceramic  system.  In  this  context,  the 
excellent  properties  of  these  materials  are  sometimes  attributed  to  phase  coexistence  [12]. 
However,  the  explanation  of  this  phase  coexistence  is  not  attributed  to  a  polyphasic  material 
but   related   to   an   exotic   crystallographic   characteristic.  

Therefore,  this  paper  aims  to  put  a  light  in  the  influence  of  the  route  processing  on  the 
lead-free  ceramics  properties,  investigating  the  structures,  microstructures,  and  dielectric 
properties  of  BCZT  and  BZT-BCT.  The  method  used  was  the  preparation  of 
0.5Ba(Zr 0.2 Ti 0.8 )O 3 –0.5(Ba 0.7 Ca 0.3 )TiO 3 ceramics  by  two  routes,  the  direct  route  (BCZT) 
defined  as  a  monophasic  system,  and  the  composite  route  (BZT-BCT)  defined  as  a  polyphasic 
system.  

The  ceramics  were  prepared  through  the  conventional  solid-state  reaction  method, 
starting  from  high-purity  precursor  powders  of  BaCO 3  (Sigma-Aldrich,  99%),  TiO 2 
(Sigma-Aldrich,  99%),  ZrO 2  (Sigma-Aldrich,  99%)  and  CaCO 3  (Vetec,  99%).  These  raw 
materials   were   mixed   according   to   the   formulations:  

BaCO 3 +CaCO 3 +ZrO 2 +TiO 2   =>   Ba 0.85 Ca 0.15 Ti 0.90 Zr 0.10 O 3 +CO 2  (BCZT)  

BaCO 3 +   ZrO 2 +TiO 2   =>   BaZr 0.20 Ti 0.80 O 3 +CO 2  (BZT)  

BaCO 3 +   TiO 2 +CaCO 3   =>   Ba 0.70 Ca 0.30 TiO 3 +CO 2  (BCT)   

The  raw  materials  were  ball  milled  for  24  h  and  the  mixtures  were  calcined  at  1200  ºC 
for  2  h  and  ball  milled  again  for  24  h  into  fine  powders,  compacted  into  disk-shaped  samples, 
and   then   sintered   at   1380  ºC   for   3  h.  This   methodology   was   named   here   direct   route.  

For  the  composite  route,  t he  calcined  powders  of  BZT  and  BCT  were  mixed  in  the 
proportion  of  50%  BCT  and  50%  BZT  ( BZT-BCT).  These  powder  were  ball  milled  for  24  h 
and  also  compacted  into  disk-shaped  samples  and  then  sintered  at  1380  ºC  for  10  min,  3  h, 
and  24  h.  The  final  density  of  each  sintered  specimen  was  determined  by  the  Archimedes 
method,   showing   values   of   the   BaTiO 3 ’s   theoretical   density   of   above   95%   in   all   cases.  

The  differential  scanning  calorimetry  (DSC)  was  performed  using  a  NETZSCH  STA 
449.  The  experiments  were  performed  in  an  atmosphere  of  synthetic  air  (O 2 /N 2 -  ¼),  with  a 
heating  rate  of  10 o C/min  using  alumina  crucible. The  crystallographic  structure  was 
investigated  using  a  Rigaku Ultima  IV  diffractometer (with  monochromatic  Cu  Kα  radiation, 
λ =  1.5406  Å) .  The  microstructure  developments  were  investigated  with  a  scanning  electron 
microscope  (FEI  -  Inspect  S50).  The  grain  size  of  the  ceramics  was  evaluated  by  the  intercept 
method  directly  on  the  SEM  images  [14]. Electrical  measurements,  in  terms  of  impedance  ( Z* 
=  Z´  +  jZ” ),  which  was  then  convertible  to  complex  permittivity  as ε*  =  ε´  +  jε” ,  were 
carried  out  from  room  temperature  to  about  200 
o C  using  a  Solartron  SI  1260 
impedance/gain-phase  analyzer  in  the  frequency  range  of f  =  100  Hz  to  13  MHz. Electric 
contacts  consisted  of  silver  (Ag)  paste  previously  applied  on  both  parallel  faces  of  the  pellets 
and   diffused   at   550  ºC   for   30  min.  

Figure  1a  and  b  show  the  DSC/TG  curves  obtained  from  the  mixture  of  the  reagents 
used  in  the  synthesis  of  BZT  and  for  the  combination  of  the  calcinated  powders  of  BCT  and 
BZT,  respectively.  The  curve  for  the  reagents  (Figure  1a)  exhibits  a  multi-step  process  that  is 
completed  at  about  1300  ºC.  Between  1030 o C  and  1180 o C  there  is  a  loss  of  14  %  in  mass  that 
is  attributed  to  the  BaCO 3  decomposition  and  the  CO 2  oxidation.  The  endothermic  peaks 
observed  at  829 o C  and  986 o C  are  linked  with  structural  phases  transitions  of  the  BaCO 3  [15]. 
The  appreciable  exothermic  reaction  at  1200 o C  was  attributed  to  the  BCZT  formation. 
Contrary  to  the  reagents  trend,  the  results  obtained  from  the  calcined  powders  do  not  show  a 
clear  thermodynamic  event  that  can  be  indicative  of  reaction  between  the  compositions 
(Figure  1b).  It  is  essential  to  point  out  that,  for  this  experiment,  no  following  thermal 
treatment  was  performed  after  the  mixture  of  BCT  and  BZT  powders.  In  particular,  an 
endothermic  event  is  observed  around  1300 o C.  This  event  is  here  attributed  to  a  fusion 
process   and   suggests   the   formation   of   a   Ti 4+    rich   phase   during   the   heating   process.  

Figure  2  shows  the  XRD  patterns  for  BCT,  BZT,  and  BCZT  compounds  after 
calcination  (at  1200  °C  for  2h).  The  figure  also  presented  the  XRD  patterns  for  the  BZT-BCT 
compounds  after  milling  (not  performed  other  calcination).  The  patterns  were  compared  with 
files  of  the  Inorganic  Crystal  Structure  Database  (ICSD).  The  patterns  for  BCT  were  indexed 
with  tetragonal  symmetry  (ICSD-71368)  and  only  one  phase  was  observed.  The  XRD  patterns 
for  BZT  reflect  the  formation  of  two  phases  that  were  identified  as  majority  phase  BZT 
(ICSD-291454)  and  minority  phase  BaZrO 3  (BZ)  (ICSD-974600).  The  presence  of  this  phase 
at  the  calcined  powder  is  indicative  that  the  temperature  should  be  higher.  As  expected,  the 
BZT-BCT  composition  reflects  the  formation  of  two  distinct  phases  that  were  identified  to  be 
isostructural   with   the   tetragonal   BZT   and   BCT.  

Figure  3  shows  the  XRD  patterns,  measured  at  room  temperature,  for  BCZT  and 
BZT-BCT  samples  after  sintering.  The  samples  were  milled  to  perform  the  characterizations, 
and  the  XRD  patterns  were  compared  with  the  files  of  ICSD.  The  XRD  result  for  BCZT 
indicates  that  the  ceramic  is  completely  crystallized  into  a  single-phase  perovskite  and 
isostructural  with  the  ICSD-186490.  No  traces  of  the  second  phase  are  observed  for  this 
composition.  However,  for  BZT-BCT  ceramic  two  phases  were  identified,  being  tetragonal 
(BCT)   and   orthorhombic   (BZT),   as   shown   in   figure   3-b.  

The  microstructures  from  the  BCZT  and  BZT-BCT  samples  are  presented  in  Figures  4a 
and  b.  The  grain  size  determined  by  the  intercept  method  was  1.5 ±  0.5 μm  for  BCZT 
ceramics.  Interestingly  here,  the  microstructure  of  the  sintered  BZT-BCT  presents  a 
homogeneous  microstructure  with  a  grain  size  of  9 ±  4  μm.  These  differences  in  grain  growth 
suggest  the  formation  of  a  liquid  phase  during  the  BZT-BCT  sintering  process.  The  liquid 
phase   normally   enhances   mass  transport   between   grains,   promoting   a   grain   growth   process.  

The  temperature  dependence  of  dielectric  constants  and  tan(δ)  of  BCZT  and  BZT-BCT 
ceramics,  measured  at  frequencies  of  100  Hz,  1  kHz,  10  kHz,  and  100  kHz,  are  presented  in 
Figures  5a  and  5b,  respectively.  The  ε’  curve  of  BCZT  ceramics,  at  least,  exhibit  two  apparent 
anomalies  that  can  be  related  to  two  phase  transitions,  the  first  associated  to  the 
Rhombohedral  (R)  –  Tetragonal  (T)  phase  transition,  and  the  second  with  Tetragonal  (T)  – 
Cubic  (C)  phase  transition  [1].  This  behavior  is  similar  to  that  observed  by  Liu  et  al.  [2].  In 
the  figure,  it  is  possible  to  note  that  the  maximum  point  in  R/T  transitions  cannot  be  defined 
due  to  their  diffusivity.  However,  an  inflection  point  at  ~50  ℃  was  taking  as  a  reference.  The 
maximum  of  the  anomaly  associated  with  T-C  transition  was  observed  at  ~83  ℃.  The  curve  of 
ε”  shows  anomalies  at  ~46  ℃  and  ~77  ℃.  As  can  be  observed  in  Figure  5b,  the  composite 
methodology  results  in  ceramics  with  different  dielectric  behavior,  once  that  only  one  phase 
transition  is  observed  at  ~93  ℃.  This  study  was  conducted  on  the  ceramics  of  the  same 
composition.  Thus  it  is  reasonable  to  postulate  that  the  observed  differences  are  related  to  the 
methodology   of   synthesis   and,   therefore,   with   the   trend   of   phase   formation   of   BZT-BCT. 

To  complete  data  analyses  are  presented  in  Figure  5c  the  results  of  permittivity  as  a 
function  of  temperature  for  the  sintered  BZT-BCT  ceramics  at  the  same  temperature  (1380  ºC) 
and  at  different  times  of  treatment:  10  min,  3  h,  and  24  h.  The  objective  was  to  check  if  the 
BZT-BCT  methodology  converges  to  BCZT  behavior  if  the  thermodynamic  is  provided.  As 
can  be  observed  in  Figure  5c,  when  the  time  of  sintering  is  increased  from  10  min  to  3  h,  one 
increment  on  the  dielectric  values  was  observed.  However,  it  was  not  observed  significant 
modifications  in  the  temperature  of  the  phase  transition.  From  3  h  to  24  h,  no  significant 
changes  are  observed,  and  the  conclusion  is  that  the  possible  phase  development  is  already 
concluded  with  3  h  of  thermal  treatment  and  the  BZT-BCT  does  not  converge  to  BCZT 
methodology.  

As  can  be  observed  in  Figure  2,  the  milling  processing  of  the  mixture  of  BZT  and  BCT  no 
offered  energy  for  BCZT  phase  formation.  Thus,  the  two  phases  are  observed  in  the  XRD  of 
BZT-BCT.  These  powders,  with  the  two  phases,  were  studied  by  thermal  analyses  (Figure  1) 
and  it  is  possible  to  conclude  that  no  thermodynamic  event  can  be  observed  between  the  BCT 
and  BZT  powders  during  the  heating  program.  Thus,  the  single  phase  formation  would  be 
expected  to  occur  from  a  slow  diffusion  process  between  the  BCT  and  BZT  elements. 
Besides,  a  possible  fusion  is  observed  in  the  DTA  curves  of  BZT-BCT  at  ~1300 o C.  This 
fusion  can  be  related  to  a  possible  Ti 4+  rich  phase.  A  non-homogeneous  diffusion  of  different 
ions  could  explain  this  phase  formation  during  the  thermal  treatment  of  the  composite. 
Interestingly  here,  this  Ti 4+ -rich  phase  can  define  the  major  grain  size  observed  for  BZT-BCT 
when  compared  with  BCZT  ceramics  (Figure  3).  This  increase  in  grain  size  in  the  composite 
route  suggests  an  intergranular  liquid  phase  that  is  formed  during  the  materials’  sintering 
process.  This  effect  is  often  observed  in  BaTiO 3 -based  ceramics  treated  at  temperatures  above 
about   1300  o C   [16].  

The  XRD  of  the  sintered  ceramics  (1380 o C/3h)  reveals  that  the  different  routes  of 
processing  results  in  different  crystalline  structures,  and  thus,  it  is  reasonable  to  expect 
different  dielectric  behavior.  As  observed  in  Figure  5a  and  b,  while  the  dielectric  profile  of  the 
BZT-BCT  ceramics  shows  only  one  anomaly,  the  BCZT  ceramics  present  two  dielectric 
anomalies.  The  direct  comparison  reveals  that  the  BCZT  rout  results  in  ceramics  with 
structure  and  behavior  similar  to  that  reported  by  Liu  and  Ren,  2009  [2].  From  this  phase 
diagram  would  be  expected  one  single  phase  transition  for  compositions  below  the  triple 
point.  In  other  words,  the  composite  route  (BZT-BCT)  could  result  in  a  different  composition 
than  that  project.  As  can  also  be  observed  in  Figure  5a  and  b,  for  both  the  ceramics,  only  one 
anomaly  associated  with  the  T-C  phase  transition  is  determined  in  temperature  spectra.  For 
BCZT  the  maximum  of  the  curve  is  observed  at  ~83 o C  while  it  occurs  at  ~93 o C  for 
BZT-BCT,  thus  one  shift  of  ~10 o C.  The  determination  of  the  temperature  of  transition  by  the 
dielectric  curve  is  largely  used  as  an  indicator  of  the  phase  and  composition  of  ceramics.  This 
being  the  case,  the  shift  in  the  temperature  of  transition  can  also  be  interpreted  as  differences 
in   compositions.  

To  advance  this  discussion,  Figure  5c  presents  the  dielectric  behavior  of  the  BZT-BCT 
sintered  at  different  times.  The  question  here  is:  Could  the  behavior  of  BZT-BCT  shift  to  the 
BCZT  if  the  thermodynamic  conditions  are  provided?  Interestingly,  even  after  thermal 
treatment  of  24  h,  the  samples  of  BZT-BCT  presented  the  same  overall  behavior  (only  one 
observed  phase  transition)  of  the  sample  sintered  for  3  hours.  On  the  other  hand,  we  observed 
an  increase  in  permittivity  values  when  the  time  of  sintering  is  increased  from  10  min  for  3  h. 

Consequently,  there  is  some  phase  development  or  microstructural  changes  in  this  interval  of 
time.  However,  after  3  h  of  thermal  treatment,  no  significant  alterations  were  observed. 
Considering  that  this  study  was  conducted  on  ceramics  of  the  same  compositions,  it  is 
reasonable  to  postulate  that  the  composite  method  results  in  ceramics  of  different  crystalline 
structures.  Thus,  the  complex  crystalline  structure  of  this  class  of  materials  is  a  consequence 
of  intrinsic  characteristics.  However,  it  is  also  dependent  on  extrinsic  characteristics  and  the 
methodology   of   the   synthesis.  

Based  on  all  performed  characterizations,  we  can  conclude  that  the  trend  of  phase 
development  is  dependent  on  the  methodology  and  the  composite  rout  (BZT-BCT)  does  not 
converge  to  the  direct  route  (BCZT)  being  observed  by  the  coexistence  of  crystalline  phases 
for  this  methodology.  This  dynamic  results  in  larger  grain  size  and,  principally,  in  different 
dielectric   behavior.  

This  work  was  supported  by  CNPq  (Grant#  2014/456879-5)  and  FAPESP  (Grant# 
2011/08497-6),   two  Brazilian   research-   funding   agencies.  
