Objective: To identify the level of knowledge, attitudes and practices related to biosafety 
measures, prevention and control by DCs during the pandemic. 

Methods: An online 
questionnaire consisting of 42 questions was disseminated to the CDs operating in Brazil 
through social networks and also to the 27 Regional Councils of Dentistry in the country via e-
mail. The collection period was from June 26 to July 2, 2020. 

Results: 751 CDs answered the 
questionnaire, of these, 54.9% undertook training in preventing and controlling the spread of 
the virus and the scientific article was the main means of information (44.5%). Regarding 
biosafety in dental care, 95.9% reported having knowledge of ANVISA's rules on the subject, 
however, regarding attitudes and practices, there was a failure to comply with the 
recommendations. Link between professional performance and training or not, were factors 
associated with greater knowledge and correct biosafety attitudes and practices. 

Conclusion: 
Although the Brazilian CDs have good levels of knowledge about biosafety measures for the 
prevention of COVID-19, they still fail to comply with basic attitudes and recommended 
practices. 

In December 2019, a new coronavirus outbreak emerged in Wuhan, in the Hubei 
Province, China, and rapidly reached another 24 countries. On January 30, 2020, the virus was 
named by the World Health Organization (WHO) as SARS-coV-2 (Severe Acute Respiratory 
Syndrome virus-Coronavirus-2) and identified as the etiological agent of COVID-19 
(“CO”Rona“VI”rus“D”isease)1,2. With the exponential increase in cases, the WHO classified 
the epidemic as a Public Health Emergency of International Concern and, on 11 March 2020, 
the SARS-coV-2 was officially declared a pandemic1,3. The first case of the disease in Brazil 
was reported on February 26, 2020, and its community transmission was declared on March 20, 
20204. 

The new coronavirus can cause serious respiratory disease, especially in high-risk 
individuals, such as the elderly and people with chronic diseases including diabetes and 
cardiovascular and respiratory diseases1,3,5. Despite the similarities to previous strains of the 
virus, SARS-coV-2 spreads more rapidly due to its high infection ability. However, its death 
rate is considered low, ranging between 3.7% in the world and 3.3% in Brazil. The global 
mortality rate of the disease is around 9.6 cases per 100,000 inhabitants and in Brazil it reaches 
48.6 per 100,000 inhabitants, being currently the 2nd country in number of confirmed cases 
(3,057,470) and deaths (101,752)6.7. 

The main mode of COVID-19 transmission is the direct contact with infected droplets 
from coughing or sneezing, in addition to the direct contact with the oral, nasal, and eye mucosa 
of infected people1,5. Due to the closeness to patients’ face and high exposure to saliva, blood, 
and other body fluids during clinical procedures, dentists are at high risk of infection, and 
dentistry is the top work category for occupational risk in the pandemic. 

As healthcare workers are vital in the control of the pandemic while being the people 
most at risk of infection, measures to reduce infection rate and spread among them are essential, 
first with the identification of risk factors and then by taking appropriate action8. 

At the beginning of the pandemic, the Federal Council of Dentistry (CFO) advised the 
Ministry of Health (MS) to interrupt the delivery of elective care in the public health system in 
the country. The guidelines for private dental offices was for dental health staff to apply the 
highest rigor in biosafety protocols and in the cleaning and disinfection of instruments, 
equipment and surfaces, as well as other recommendations to reduce infection risk. 

On March 31, the CFO, the National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA), the 
Brazilian Association of Dentistry (ABO), and the Brazilian Association of Intensive Care 
Medicine (AMIB) released a joint guideline (GVIMS/GGTES/ANVISA Nº 04/2020 Technical 
Note) of prevention and control measures for clinical procedures of suspected or confirmed 
infected COVID-19 patients in clinics and hospitals. The document also classifies emergency 
and urgent dental procedures and provides oral hygiene protocols for Intensive Care Unit 
(ICUs) patients10. 

Although dentists have a high risk of infection by the new coronavirus and can become 
silent spreaders, the spread of the disease can be controlled by following rigorous biosafety 
guidelines11,12. Having appropriate knowledge of a disease can influence the behavior of 
healthcare workers, while incorrect actions directly increase the risk of infection10. Therefore, 
the aim of this study was to assess the level of biosafety knowledge of dentists, and actions and 
measures adopted for prevention and control of the new coronavirus pandemic and their impact 
on daily practice. 

This was a cross-sectional survey and thus an ethics approval was not needed, as, 
according to the resolution 510/2016 of the National Health Council, the survey collects the 
opinion of participants on a subject in a specific point in time using specific methodology and 
participants are anonymous13. 

An 
online 
questionnaire 
created 
on 
Google 
Forms 
(https://forms.gle/jg4VHtUFzGysgJ1UA) was used for data collection. The questionnaire was 
verified by two dentists and a sanitarian, to ensure the correct interpretation of items. Data 
collection occurred from June 26 to July 2, 2020. 

A sample size calculation was done to determine a sample representative of the 
population of registered dentists in the country using the formula n = [EDFF*Np(1-p)]/ 
[(d2/Z21-α/2*(N-1)+p*(1-p)], considering a 50% prevalence of the outcome, a confidence 
interval of 99%, an absolute error of 5%, and the size of the population in June 2020 of 337,997 
dentists.14 To the calculated sample size of 663 individuals was added 13% to account for 
potential losses, totaling 750 dentists15. 

The link to the online search was distributed to dentists through social networks 
(WhatsApp, Facebook, Instagram, and Telegram) and sent to the 27 Regional Councils of 
Dentistry (CROs) asking to send the link to respective registered dentists. Four CROs, two from 
the Northeast region, one from the North, and one from the Midwest responded to our request. 
Recipients were informed of their anonymity and that participation was voluntary.   

The questionnaire consisted of 42 items divided into 3 sections. The 1st section included 
8 items about respondents’ characteristics, such as region of the country, years since graduation, 
highest level of education/degree, and employment status. Section 2 consisted of 11 items about 
the knowledge of biosafety recommendations for the prevention and control of SARS-coV-2 
infection with “agree” and “disagree” answers. Section 3 included 23 items related to biosafety 
actions and measures taken during the pandemic, with “agree” and “disagree” answers. Items 
correctly answered received 1 point and incorrect items were given a 0. 
Descriptive analysis was performed providing number and percentage of study 
variables. In addition, a knowledge score and actions and measures score were calculated, by 
adding the scores of answered questions. The mean score between groups was compared with 
the Kruskall-Wallis Test, with a significance level of 5%. For data analysis, the Stata software 
version 14.0 was used. 

A total of 751 dentists answered the questionnaire, most of them female (70.8%), aged 
between 25 and 34 years (58.6%), with less than 5 years since graduation (57.8%), and from 
the Northeast region (79.9%). The majority of respondents had a DDS degree as the highest 
education level (38.3%), most were employed in the public service (26.0%), and had monthly 
income between 2,500 and 5,000 reals (49.5%). Most dentists reported attending a training 
course on prevention and control measures against the new coronavirus (54.9%), and most did 
so voluntarily (58.7%). The main source of information on ways to prevent the spread of the 
new coronavirus was scientific articles (Table 1). 

Almost all (95.9%) dentists reported being aware of ANVISA's biosafety measures for 
dental practice. However, 14.5% of respondents considered providing alcohol gel and 
demanding the use of a mask in the waiting room exaggerated measures, 17.6% did not know 
the correct way to remove personal protection equipment, and 43.9% believed that symptomatic 
patients should not receive any type of dental treatment. In addition, 71.0% felt qualified to 
provide educational and preventive activities on the new coronavirus (Table 2). 

Some respondents did not follow the biosafety actions and measures for dental practice 
recommended by health authorities. More than half of the respondents reported not using rubber 
dam isolation in procedures with high speed motors, 41.4% did not ask patients to do a 
mouthwash with hydrogen peroxide before treatment, 40.5% did not prioritize four-handed 
work with an assistant, 34.4% did not follow the recommended procedure for saliva aspiration, 
46.6% did not use absorbable suture when possible, and 44.2% did not use extraoral mouth x-
rays when possible. In addition, 19.0% provided dental treatment other than emergency 
treatment during the pandemic, and 61.3% provided preventive educational activities on the 
new coronavirus (Table 3). 

The biosafety knowledge of dentists had a mean score of 9.41 (± SD = 1.28), with the 
minimum of 5 and maximum of 11 correct answers, and 50% of the sample had scores ≥10 
(median = 10.0). A significant difference was found for type of employment and taking a 
training course on prevention and control measures. Dentists with other employment status and 
public servants had better scores than the other groups (p = 0.004). In addition, dentists that 
received training had higher scores (p <0.001) (Table 4). 

The mean score for biosafety measures for prevention and control of the spread of the 
new coronavirus was 15.22 (±SD = 3.31), with a minimum of 4, maximum of 20, and median 
of 15.0. Significant differences were found among all groups evaluated. Highest scores were 
observed for men (median = 16.0; p = 0.040), age ≥45 years (median = 18.0; p <0.001), years 
from graduation ≥10 (median = 17.0; p <0.001), public servants and the “other” employment 
category (median = 16 and 17.0, respectively; p <0.001), those who had postdoctoral fellowship 
as the highest educational level (median = 18.5; p <0.001), a monthly income above R$ 
5,000.00 (median = 17.0; p <0.001), and those who received training on the COVID prevention 
and control measures (median = 16.0; p <0.001) (Table 5). 

According to the collected data, most Brazilian dentists pursued up-to-date information 
on national biosafety standards for the new coronavirus, taking training sessions and referring 
to scientific articles as source of information. These actions reflect the worldwide alarming and 
unprecedented situation that has taken place with the COVID pandemic and the fear of infection 
during provision of dental care16,17, motivating the pursuit for preventive guidelines. 

According to Ghai et al. (2020)18, knowledge about preventive measures on the new 
coronavirus can play an important role in helping dentists to adopt appropriate actions in their 
practice. However, while the availability of information about the pandemic is welcome, care 
must be taken with the reliability and authenticity of the source, to minimize the conveying of 
incorrect content19. Thus, workers should rely on official guidelines11. 

Despite the high interest about the COVID-19 pandemic information, essential steps to 
reduce the overall risk of contracting or transmitting the infection is neglected by many dentists, 
such as the use of rubber dam isolation, adequate saliva aspiration, and use of hydrogen 
peroxide-based mouthwash prior to treatment. Such practices aim to minimize the production 
of infected spills and aerosols, decreasing the risk of infection10,20, and therefore, should be 
meticulously followed. 

In addition, a large proportion of respondents believed that symptomatic patients should 
not receive any type of treatment, which is not the recommendations of the official bodies 
establishing that any emergency case must be treated within the recommended care. A study 
conducted in a dental emergency department in Beijing reported an increase in dental and oral 
infections with the start of the COVID-19 pandemic21, indicating that the selection and 
postponement of care by dentists must be done with caution even in symptomatic respiratory 
patients to avoid the worsening of the dental condition, imposing subsequent risks for the 
patient. 

This study also addressed the educational role of the dentist for the COVID prevention. 
Although most participants reported feeling confident of their ability to inform the population, 
61.3% were not providing specific information. This may reflect insecurity in their role as a 
health promoting agent in the dental office, which should not be restricted to clinical practice. 
De Stefani et al. (2020)22 highlight that all healthcare workers can help provide accurate 
information and stress the importance of social distancing and other measures to reduce the 
spread of the virus. 

Dentists of the public network and those who reported taking a training course were 
more knowledgeable about biosafety in dental care. In addition, higher scores of biosafety 
actions and measures were associated with male dentists, those aged 45 and over, with more 
than 10 years since graduation, having a post-doctoral degree, and monthly income higher than 
R$ 5,000.00. These results suggest that professional experience associated with high levels of 
education has positive impacts on taking preventive measures against COVID-19. In addition, 
the higher scores of public servants are probably due to the support of the national health 
authorities and professional councils to dentists from the public health system since the 
beginning of the pandemic and the interruption of elective treatments9,23. This has increased the 
time available for training courses and allowed more time for each patient and in between 
appointments, in addition to having a fixed salary, factors that allow the adjustment to the 
recommended biosafety measures. 

For private dentists, the interruption of elective treatments represents a critical financial 
loss24. Ethical and moral reflections are thus raised and concerns surpass clinical biosafety and 
social indifference. Government regulations must be sustainable in the long term with the aim 
of protecting private dentists, ensuring that their activities can be performed with dignity and 
safely while avoiding economic crises. 

Considering the high risk of infection from COVID-19 and other respiratory diseases 
during dental care, biosafety measures are essential for the provision of a safe dental 
treatment1,26. In addition, as a future perspective, strategies and actions must be developed to 
ensure biosafety in the work environment and the quality of life of staff and patients. 

Due to the pandemic, data collection methods have to be adapted. One effective method 
is the online survey, which, like any other research method, has advantages and limitations, but 
can still produce valid results. For this study, measures have been taken to reduce the effect 
selection bias, such as sending the questionnaire to all Regional Councils of Dentistry of Brazil. 
However, due to a low response rate from dentists in the South and Central West regions, the 
generalizability of the results is limited, and the results must be viewed critically. 

The results of this study revealed that Brazilian dentists present good levels of 
knowledge about biosafety measures for COVID-19, however, many did not follow basic 
actions and recommended measures. In addition, the employment status and taking a course on 
the subject were factors associated with both greater knowledge and correct application of 
biosafety measures. Further studies with larger sample sizes are necessary for more accurate 
results. 
