We establish formulae for the regularized determinant of the twisted Laplacians on forms over odd dimensional real projective spaces. This work corresponds to a generalization of the previous formula for this type of space and we prove the equivalence in the common cases, what leads to interesting, if simple, identities involving special values of Bernoulli polynomials and the Riemann zeta function. As application, we calculate the Analytic Torsion of these spaces in relation to all unitary representations of their fundamental group.
Regularized determinant is a concept that arises from the study of the spectral zeta functions and has applications on areas such as analytic number theory, global analysis and physics.
The spectral zeta functions were established by Minakshisundaram and Pleijel [10] as special Dirichlet series constructed in terms of the eigenvalues of the Laplacian on functions over compact differentiable Riemannian manifolds. Since these functions re- vealed themselves to be useful on a wide range of applications, they were appropriately generalized to several contexts.
This research was developed while I, the author, was a Ph.D. stutend at Universidade Federal de S˜ao Carlos (UFScar). The advisor of the course, professor L. R. Hartmann and his advisor M. Spreafico offered me technical support during the research that led to this article sending me references that were useful during the research.
It is important to mention that this project was developed alongside the reference [6]. These authors presented me a preliminar/unfinished version of [6] and asked me to finish it with the level of generality present in this manuscript and [13], but I did not understand their reasoning by the time, so I decided to restart from zero using a different approach. During the time this research was developed, professor Hartmann was on Germany, professor Spreafico was on Italy and I was on Brazil, so I was working independently. When professor Hartmann finished his studies on Germany and came back to Brazil, he decided to finish and submit [6] with M. Spreafico and allowed me to submit my text alone. I did not express at any moment during the course that I wanted to publish my thesis alone, but I stayed very happy with his decision, even though I recognize they helped me, so I was not really working alone. In retribution to their help I tried to help them on [6] as much as I could.