RAE-Revista de Administração de Empresas (Journal of Business Management)
82  
   © RAE | São Paulo | 60(2) | March-April 2020 | 82-83
ISSN 0034-7590; eISSN 2178-938X
EDITORIAL
Felipe Zambaldi 
Editor-adjunto
Maria José Tonelli
Editora-chefe
RESEARCH DURING THE TIME OF THE PANDEMIC
While producing this issue of RAE, we were surprised by the intense transformation caused 
by the spread of COVID-19 worldwide. It is impossible not to remember the film Melancholia 
by Lars Von Trier. At this moment (I am writing in the first week of April in the city of São 
Paulo), it is not possible to predict the direction the pandemic will take in Brazil. As with 
academic journals, our articles and forums, organized in six annual editions, are planned 
well in advance. Our issues for the year 2020 are all underway, as well as some editions of 
2021. In this sense, the number of submissions may decrease next year due to the pandemic. 
However, we expect that scientific production in business administration will grow creatively 
in the coming decades. Although we do not have a crystal ball to predict the changes that 
may occur in practice and research, the ongoing debate suggests several profound changes 
in several areas. These areas, which make business administration complex in global 
times, include the following: organizational behavior, wherein leaders and engagement are 
essential in times of crises; work organization; social media marketing and retail, as the 
online world has boosted consumption through deliveries; humanitarian logistics, which 
had already developed after Hurricane Katrina; behavioral finance; companies and human 
rights; business social impact; sustainability in a broad sense along with the UN Sustainable 
Development Goals; health management; and public-private partnership. It looks like the 
21st century has really begun now. Will globalization be rethought? Will our travel around 
the planet decrease? Will education in business schools be rethought? Although this is a 
distressing situation, we have many questions and no answers about how the situation 
will evolve. However, scientific research is being strengthened, which encourages all of us—
professors and researchers. The post-pandemic world will be rebuilt, and several initiatives 
are being taken in this direction: Scientific journals in several fields have already published 
calls for papers that address this new scenario. National and international research 
centers are partnering to develop joint projects. Funding agencies are providing financial 
resources for projects. Thus, although people are going through a harrowing period, creative 
possibilities have opened up for research on new forms of management. 
Translated version
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/S0034-759020200201
RAE-Revista de Administração de Empresas (Journal of Business Management)
83  
   © RAE | São Paulo | 60(2) | March-April 2020 | 82-83
ISSN 0034-7590; eISSN 2178-938X
Focusing on the field of Organizational Studies, the forum presented in this issue comes in handy. How 
can we integrate our studies with those of colleagues in Latin America? Can and should we rethink the principles 
that have guided the research so far? The president of Fapesp, Carlos Henrique de Brito Cruz (*), states that the 
internationalization of research is fundamental for the development of science. This issue, dedicated to Latin America, 
questions the principles that guided the growth of Organizational Studies in this region. It includes the following 
works: “Organizational Studies in Latin America: Towards a research agenda,” by Diego Szlechter, Leonardo Solarte 
Pazos, Juliana Cristina Teixeira, Jorge Feregrino, Pablo Isla Madariaga, and Rafael Alcadipani; “To think from Latin 
America in dialogue with the organization of decolonial social struggles: Exploring possibilities,” by Maria Ceci 
Misoczky and Guilherme Dornelas Camara; “Organizational Studies in Latin America: back to the rough ground!” by 
Diego René Gonzales-Miranda; “Experiencing Agreste: Trials for research about people and business in a peripheral 
context,” by Marcio Sá; “No politics, no society: Questioning the justification of entrepreneurship in Chilean public 
policies,” by Oriana Bernasconi and Juan Felipe Espinosa-Cristia; “Tupi, or not Tupi that is the question”: Amerindian 
perspectivism and Organizational Studies,” by Sergio Eduardo de Pinho Velho Wanderley and Ana Paula Medeiros 
Bauer; and “Organizing the Organizational Studies in Chile: History of the creation of the Minga Group,” by Gregorio 
Perez-Arrau, Alvaro Espejo, Marcela Mandiola, Nicolás Ríos González, and Juan Pablo Toro.
This issue is concluded by the essay, “Where did we come from, where are we going? A collective self-criticism 
and desirable horizons for Organizational Studies in Brazil,” by Marcio Sá, Rafael Alcadipani, Ariston Azevedo, Ariádne 
Scalfoni Rigo, and Luiz Alex Silva Saraiva. These authors also address the theme of this forum.
Happy reading and take care!
Maria José Tonelli1 | ORCID: 0000-0002-6585-1493
Felipe Zambaldi1 | ORCID: 0000-0002-5378-6444
1Fundação Getulio Vargas, São Paulo School of Business Administration, São Paulo, SP, Brazil
 (*) Professor Carlos Henrique de Brito Cruz, President 
of Fapesp, leaves office in April 2020. Interview 
granted to the Folha de S.Paulo newspaper on 
April 7, 2020. Site accessed on April 7, 2020: 
https://www1.folha.uol.com.br/
equilibrioesaude/2020/04/vamos-sofrer-
menos-se-nos-basearmos-na-ciencia-mas-
ela-nao-faz-magica-diz-brito-cruz.shtml
