Outbreaks of new virus infections among people are always a public health problem 
(Bonilla-Aldana et al., 2020). The risk of these outbreaks depends on the 
characteristics of the virus, including whether it spreads from person to person and 
how well it spreads, the severity of the resulting disease, and the medical or other 
measures available to control the impact of the virus (for example, vaccines or 
treatment medications)(Millán-Oñate et al., 2020). 

For the COVID-19, has been expanding quickly to each region of the world, causing 
many complications and deaths, estimated that 59,884 have died from this disease 
(Mapa del coronavirus (COVID-19), s. f.), which is required to apply strict measures 
such as quarantine(Cuero, 2020); to quarantine often be an unpleasant experience for 
those who suffer, since it includes separation, loss of freedom, uncertainty and 
boredom. There are even reports of suicide attempts and secondary suicide. This is 
why before considering these measures, these complications should be considered 
and weighed against the benefit(Shander et al., 2020). 

Some studies have compared the psychological effects of people in quarantine against 
controls. The most common symptoms are those related to stress and trauma, 
particularly acute stress disorder. Quarantined personnel also have a greater 
propensity to report exhaustion, detachment, anxiety, impaired performance, and 
resistance to work. Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and depression may 
develop in the long term(Druss, 2020). 

For all the above research question arises as to determine the symptoms of anxiety 
and depression during the isolation period the outbreak of COVID-19 in Paraguay. 

Cross-sectional study during the 17 to 20 March 2020 were surveyed every citizen 
resident in Paraguay, of both sexes, over 18 years of age, who agreed to participate 
in the study, confirming entry into the study link. 
The distribution of the surveys was carried out through groups of "WhatsApp" and 
social networks "Twitter" and "Facebook". All participants were first explained the 
purpose of the study and uses the results. 

To measure anxiety and depressive symptoms, the Goldberg Anxiety and Depression 
Scale (EADG) was used; each subscale has 9 dichotomous response items (Yes / No) 
and are structured in 4 initial screening items, to determine whether or not there is a 
probable mental disorder, and a second group of 5 items that are formulated if Obtains 
positive answers to screening questions (2 or more for anxiety and more than 1 for 
depression), but the full scale is usually applied in the research, and was used in this 
study in this way. 

An independent score is given for each scale, with one point for each affirmative 
answer. Goldberg et al. (1988) have proposed as cut-off points ≥ 4 for the anxiety 
scale, and ≥ 2 for the depression scale(Koloski et al., 2008). 
The data provided by the questionnaire was initially saved in a Microsoft Office Excel 
2013 © spreadsheet and exported to the STATA 14.0 ® statistical package for 
analysis. The results are expressed in tables of proportions. 

The data obtained from the questionnaire were treated with confidentiality, equality 
and fairness, respecting the Helsinki principles. Those who wanted to know their 
situation had the option to put their email to receive relevant guidance. 

1180 subjects participated in the study, of which 34.24% (404) were between 20 and 
29 years old, 51.53 % (608) were female, 39.07 % (461) were married, 35.51 % (419) 
were university students and 63.73 % (752) were from the inside of the country (Table 
1). 

When comparing anxiety symptoms with demographic characteristics, it is obtained: 
55.31% (125) of the people in the age group between 40 - 49 years of age had anxious 
symptoms, 50% (304) of women, 49.30% (282), 51.41 % (237) of those married, 
51.24% (165) of those with secondary education, 51.33% (386) of those from the 
interior of the country, and 46.73% (200) of those from Asunción + Metropolitan area. 
Regarding depressive symptoms and demographic characteristics, it is obtained: 
48.89% (83) of people in the age group of 30 - 39 years had depressive symptoms, 
49.48% (283) of men, 45.07% (274) of women, 56.13% (229) of the never married, 
57.28 (240) of the university students and 52.80% ( 226 ) of the residents in Asunción 
+ Metropolitan Area (Table 3). 

Psychosocial disorders (depression and anxiety) increasingly affect the health of the 
general population. 

The study draws attention for demonstrating an inverse relationship with the literature 
and previous studies that show a higher frequency of cases of depression in people 
of the female sex and those over 50 years of age(Belló et al., 2005; Gómez-Restrepo 
et al., 2004; Juanes, s. f.). However, regarding Anxiety, it coincides with the literature 
of prevalence studies where the prevalence usually occurs in Women and in ages 
between 40 and 50 years(Balanza Galindo et al., 2009; El trastorno de ansiedad 
generalizada, s. f.; Epidemiología del Trastorno de Ansiedad Generalizada. | 
Psiquiatria.com, s. f.). 

The same thing happens if you look at the “Civil Status” of the population, since in the 
literature it is possible to find the same criteria together with that of “Marital 
Satisfaction”, as protective factors, in the face of the development of symptoms related 
to Anxiety and depression, without however, the results show a higher prevalence 
weight of anxiety in married people, which is repeated in terms of the depression. This 
can also be transferred to the concept of general health for both pathologies(Posada-
Villa et al., 2006; Simó-Noguera et al., 2015; Valdez Medina, José Bastidas-González, 
R, 2017). 

Although the general population exceeds school age (the first interval of the minimum 
age still belongs to the pre-university school age), it is interesting to know a study that 
found a relationship between family dynamics and manifestations of depression. Being 
the normal functional family the one with the highest number of depressed 
schoolchildren. In this same study, an association was found between manifestations 
of depression and socioeconomic level(Hinostroza-Gastelú, s. f.). The criteria related 
to this economic level of study (None) and the Primary, Secondary and University 
Levels, can be related to certain economic dependence on parents or on the work 
done itself (the profit of which is reinvested in professional training in people who are 
students and pay for their studies with work). In this sense, it is possible to observe in 
all these sets of analysis criteria, the characteristics positively related to Anxious and 
Depressive symptoms (more with Anxiety), but just as positive with anxiety, although 
to a lesser degree. 

The presence of symptoms associated with depression is quite evident in all age 
ranges, always being closer to 50% and never below 40%. 

In adolescents, this type of symptomatology is linked to conflicts in interpersonal 
relationships with peers and adults, being the process of seeking health or help more 
oriented towards other adolescents, rather than professionals in the area of mental 
health(Garcia Mantilla et al., 2018).  In time of confinement, this could become a rather 
problematic situation, in the sense that the rules of social isolation per se limit 
interaction with “peers” and, on the other hand, assistance or seeking professional 
help within of a health device, it is prioritized for cases related to the Pandemic, there 
are no clear protocols for mental health protection. 

Being a female, belonging to the rank of "Older Adult" and being ill reveals 
relationships with depression, as well as having limitations to carry out 
activities(Gorete Reis et al., 2009). These Characteristics are broadly reflected in the 
greater anxious and depressive symptoms on the part of women with these age 
characteristics. The fact of confinement and lack of interaction could become a "risk 
factor" for maintaining their health. 

One of the main comorbidities of Depression and to a lesser extent for Anxious 
disorders, are related to a complex network of factors associated with suicide 
attempts. No factor studied has proved to be more important or "crucial”, by itself, for 
the effectiveness of the attempts, it can be inferred that tedium, characterized as time 
devoid of meaning (very related to confinement and social isolation), has a 
predominant place (Minayo et al., 2016). An increase in the number of suicide 
attempts, such as completed suicides, could occur, if the necessary attention and 
containment are not given in the general population, with an emphasis on the 
populations mentioned in published research articles. 

As social interaction activities based on telephone calls via mobile phone have an 
inverse correlation with the degree of risk of social isolation(Martínez Rebollar & 
Campos Francisco, 2015). Therefore, one of the most interesting approaches in the 
groups considered in the elderly group has to do with not leaving them only in 
confinement or in the case that confinement is a necessary element / either because 
some member of the family have the need to go out for work (as is the example of the 
personnel related to the health area), carry out repeated interactions through the 
different platforms of social interaction, both voice and video. For this, the use of social 
networks fulfills and will continue to fulfill a contentious role that can broaden its action, 
as a factor of protection and prevention of morbid states related to Depression and 
Anxiety. 

The main factors associated with the perception of poor health and poor quality of life 
are the presence of anxiety and depression disorders, social isolation and lack of 
exercise, dependence on basic and instrumental activities (such as care 
personal)(Azpiazu Garrido et al., 2002). In this sense, the presence of symptoms 
related to anxiety and depression can "make people feel" as lacking health or in danger 
of losing it and the restrictions of mobility added to the loss of capacities for basic and 
instrumental activities, as well as the need for emotional containment, it could be 
perceived as a state of lability or weakness in the emotional and instrumental 
(behavioral) factors necessary to maintain autonomy in daily life. 
According to the latest publication of the Basic Health Indicators, the General 
unemployment rate in Paraguay corresponds to the urban population at 7.2 and the 
rural population at 4.5(Indicadores Básicos de Salud, s. f.). However, the study data 
show a lower rate of both pathologies in the urban area, but in the rural area, the 
relationship is reversed. 

The depression-anxiety comorbidity is a risk factor for the development of suicidal 
behavior more important than these conditions separately or other diagnoses. This 
association confers greater risk than other factors related to conformation and family 
history among them: family history of suicidal behavior, not having children, or age 
younger than 35 years(Baca García & Aroca, 2014). These characteristics must be 
taken into account for their evaluation, containment and, if required, treatment in the 
mental health area, therefore, the detection and treatment protocols in this area to be 
developed, as supplements to those currently used for the purpose of "containment", 
they will be extremely useful. In Paraguay there is a “Death by Suicide” rate of 9.3 in 
Men and 3.2 in women, the prevalence of both pathologies being practically the same. 

Among the limitations of the study, the method of data collection can be mentioned 
mainly, since it was not possible to access a good sample size, and people who did 
not have an internet connection could not complete the survey either. 
By way of conclusion, it is possible to indicate that a large proportion of the population 
presented anxious or depressive symptoms, which was seen in almost the same 
measure in both sexes, however, it occurred mainly at an older age and residents of 
the interior of the country. It is necessary to apply psychological containment 
measures in quarantine periods, since it is a time when most people find themselves 
in a situation of vulnerability and many stressors that lead to states of anxiety and 
depression. 
