We establish formulae for the regularized determinant of the Lapla- cian and twisted Laplacian on forms over even dimensional real projective spaces and use them to explicitly calculate the analytic torsion of these spaces with orthogonal and unitary representations of their fundamental group, obtaining the ﬁrst example to show that this torsion is non-trivial for cyclic complexes associated to even dimensional non-orientable mani- folds. Moreover, as discussed in the introduction, the several proofs of the Cheeger-M¨uller Theorem given throughout years left one speciﬁc question unanswered and we answer this question for this type of space.
The deﬁnition of analytic torsion was created by Ray and Singer [19] as an analytic version for Reidemeister torsion (see section 5 for a discussion about this concept), and these authors conjectured that for odd dimensional orientable manifolds with orthogonal representation of the fundamental group these tor- sions were equivalent, what had already been proved for lens spaces on [18] and for even dimensional orientable manifolds as a consequence of Theorem 2.3 of [19].
It is important to mention that these authors followed Milnor’s deﬁnition of Reidemeister torsion, given on section 8 of [12], but they extended this deﬁnition, since Milnor considered exclusively acyclic complexes, i. e., complexes whose homology is trivial, and Ray and Singer considered also the cyclic cases. It is also important to mention that both [12] and [19] considered homology when dealing with Reidemeister torsion and this was specially relevant on [19], since these authors needed Poincar´e duality to deﬁne the bases used for homology groups in the cyclic case.
On 1978, Werner M¨uller [14] published a proof for the conjecture of Ray- Singer, which is known as the Cheeger-M¨uller Theorem, and he considered ex- clusively orientable manifolds throughout the text. Moreover, he made a slight change in the problem proposed by Ray and Singer, since he considered the Rei- demeister torsion of the cohomology complex associated to a manifold rather than homology. On 1979, Cheeger [5] published an independent proof of the same problem and also considered cohomology when proving the theorem, even though his proof does not require orientability.
The Cheeger-M¨uller Theorem was studied by Bismut and Zhang on 1992, [1], who also considered cohomology when dealing with Reidemeister torsion, fol- lowing [5] and [14], but these authors extended this result to odd dimensional closed Riemannian manifolds with unimodular representation of the fundamen- tal group, and constructed an integral formula which describes the relation between the two torsions on the even dimensional case.
On 1993, [15], M¨uller returned to the conjecture proposed by Ray and Singer, this time using homology to study Reidemeister torsion, and he proved that both torsions have the same value on odd dimensional manifolds with unimodular rep- resentation of the fundamental group, what does not happen in general in the even dimensional case, as exampliﬁed on page 732 of the same text, [15]. How- ever, the approach used by M¨uller when dealing with cyclic complexes required the use of orientability because to describe the volumes used in the cyclic case, ﬁrst paragraph of page 729, the author needed Poincar´e duality and there is no indication of how to replace this concept in the non-orientable setting. This speciﬁc choice of volumes is fundamental for Theorem 2.15 and Corollary 2.16 of [15], which were originally proved by Ray and Singer on [19] for orthogonal representations and were extended by M¨uller [15] to the unimodular case. In section 3, the core part of the proof of Cheeger-M¨uller Theorem, the speciﬁc choice of volumes also plays an important role, specially on page 745.
The Cheeger-M¨uller Theorem was studied again on [3], [4] and [10], but these authors also considered cohomology when dealing with Reidemeister torsion.
In this text we prove that Cheeger-M¨uller Theorem is valid for even dimen- sional real projective spaces in the sense discussed on [15] by explicitly calcu- lating their analytic and Reidemeister torsions, see Theorem 5.1. To calculate the analytic torsion we ﬁrst establish formulae for the regularized determinant of the Laplacian, Theorem 3.1 and Corollary 3.3, and we use these formulae to obtain the desired torsion, Theorem 4.2. This reasoning was inspired by [22], even though these authors did not establish regularized determinant formulae. To calculate the Reidemeister torsion we ﬁrst establish homology bases for odd dimensional projective spaces, which are orientable, and we use these bases as references for our speciﬁc choice in the even dimensional case. It is important to mention that these torsions are not trivial for RP2m, contrary to what hap- pens for orientable even dimensional manifolds, as expressed by Proposition 2.9 of [15]. We have no knowledge of any prior reference showing an example of this fact for even dimensional non-orientable manifolds with cyclic representation of the fundamental group.
Our study is divided in the following way: section 2 is dedicated to es- tablishing the notation that will be used throughout the text as well as some fundamental preliminary results for our determinant formulae, the most impor- tant ones are the decomposition of the spaces of forms into SO(n + 1)-modules, Table 2, and the derivative at zero of a speciﬁc Dirichlet series, Lemma 2.1. Section 3 is devoted to establishing the formulae for regularized determinants, which will be used on section 4 to calculate the analytic torsion of RP2m. On section 5, the ﬁnal section, we deﬁne the Reidemeister torsion of real chain complexes and describe how to ﬁx bases for the homology groups of RP2m−1, following M¨uller’s approach to the problem, [15]. We then use these data to determine the speciﬁc bases that would be used to calculate the Reidemeister torsion of odd dimensional projective spaces and adapt these bases to the even dimensional case to obtain the Reidemeister torsion of RP2m in relation to this particular choice of bases. Since the results obtained on sections 4 and 5 are equal, we conclude the validity of Cheeger-M¨uller Theorem for RP2m in the setting discussed in this text.
The ﬁrst step for establishing our formula for regularized determinants is to determine the spectrum and multiplicity of eingenvalues of the Laplacian on forms over even dimensional real projective spaces. To achieve this objective we outline part of the study of Ikeda and Taniguchi [9].
In section 6 of [9] the authors deﬁne the spaces of harmonic polynomial forms
The research that led to this paper was developed while I was a Ph.D student at Universidade Federal de S˜ao Carlos. I would like to thank Picme/Capes for granting a scholarship that allowed me to dedicate exclusively to the course. I would also like to thank L.R. Hartmann, the advisor of the course, and to M.Spreaﬁco for technical support during the research. It is important to men- tion that Hartmann and Spreaﬁco sent me a preliminar version of [8], with the intention that I should follow their reasoning and calculate the analytic torsion of RP2m while Hartmann was on Germany and Spreaﬁco was on Italy. Since I did not understand their approach to the problem by the time and therefore did not follow their reasoning, Hartmann decided that we should publish our texts separately. I strongly appreciate that decision because I know he liked this research project and he spontaneously proposed that I published it alone. Still in relation to them, it is important to acknowledge that the data of Table 2, as well as the data of the corresponding table for n = 2m −1 of [16] were present at their preliminar version of [8].
I also want to thank the students of UFSCar, some of the professors and specially my family for supporting me during the diﬃculties of the course.