Background: Sacubitril/valsartan has proven its efficacy to reduce cardiovascular mortality, 
all-cause mortality and sudden death in heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF). 
Thus, it becomes important to evaluate the safety profile of the medication in clinical practice.  

Objectives: This study aimed to assess safety outcomes on the use of sacubitril/valsartan in 
patients with HFrEF attended in a Brazilian specialized service. 

Methods: Prospective observational study that included patients with HFrEF from a 
specialized ambulatory service, in functional class II-IV, initiated on sacubitril/valsartan as 
per clinical indication, with a four-month follow-up. Primary outcomes were the occurrence 
of symptomatic arterial hypotension, hyperkalemia and reduction of renal function. Serum 
potassium values, blood pressure and creatinine clearance were analyzed at inclusion and at 
the end of follow-up. A 5% significance level was considered for comparisons. 

Results: Twenty-six patients were analyzed, 57.7% male, mean age 57.8 ± 10 years, average 
left ventricle ejection fraction 29.9 ± 7.7%. Symptomatic hypotension occurred in 53.8%, 
hyperkalemia in 19.2% and reduction of renal function in 6.7%. There was significant 
difference from initial to final systolic (122 ± 24mmHg versus 109 ± 15mmHg; p=0.024) and 
diastolic (76 ± 18mmHg versus 66 ± 12mmHg; p=0.022) blood pressure, but no difference in 
serum potassium (4.8 ± 0.4mEq/L versus 5.0 ± 0.3mEq/L; p=0.07) and creatinine clearance 
(65 ± 23mL/min/1.73m² versus 66 ± 29mL/min/1.73m²; p=0.89).  

Conclusions: 
Symptomatic 
hypotension 
was 
the 
most 
frequent 
side-effect 
of 
sacubitril/valsartan. Reduction of blood pressure was observed at the end of follow-up, but no 
reduction of renal function or significant increase of serum potassium. 

Heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) is a chronic disease with high morbidity 
and mortality, affecting over 26 milllion individuals around the globe.1 From diagnosis, 
clinical evolution is insidious despite medical treatment, causing death in at least in fourth of 
the patients after five years.2 In Brazil and other developing countries, the scenario is even 
worse, with urgent need to implement the best therapies available to reduce adverse  
outcomes. The BREATHE registry (Brazilian Registry of Heart Failure - Clinical aspects, 
care quality and hospitalization outcomes) highlighted the real-world national mortality of 
12.6%, four times higher than in countries such as the United States.3,4 

Important therapeutic milestones with prognostic impact in HFrEF arised throughout the 
years and decades. In the late 1980’s and early 1990’s, angiotensin–converting-enzyme 
inhibitors (ACEI) proved their efficacy in HFrEF by reducing mortality in more than 30%.5,6 
In 1997 the use of mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists, such as spironolactone showed a 
significant benefit in HFrEF as an add-on medication.7 In 2001, metoprolol succinate and 
carvedilol confirmed the irrefutable role of beta-blockers in HFrEF almost simultaneously, 
defining the pharmacological triad that sustains the treatment of the disease until nowadays.8,9  
After that, only in 2014 the PARADIGM-HF study (Prospective comparison of ARNI with 
ACEI to Determine Impact on Global Mortality and morbidity in Heart Failure trial) revealed 
sacubitril-valsartan as a new treatment option with significant survival benefit.10 

National and international guidelines recommend to prescribe sacubitril/valsartan to patients 
with symptomatic HFrEF despite optimal medical treatment.11-13 However, possible side-
effects, such as arterial hypotension, hyperkalemia and acute renal dysfunction can inhibit its 
use in some populations. Local and regional analysis are desirable in HFrEF and contribute to 
the knowledge concerning medical therapy in HFrEF. Thus, the aim of this study was to 
assess tolerability and safety outcomes of sacubitril/valsartan in patients with HFrEF who 
were refractory to optimized medical treatment.  

We analyzed patients with HFrEF from an ambulatory specialized service that belongs to 
Brazilian public health system, included from April to August 2018, with clinical follow-up 
of at least four months. One-hundred and five patients were initially identified in regular 
appointments in the specialized ambulatory service. 

Patients 18 years of age or older, with previous diagnosis of HFrEF – left ventricle ejection 
fraction (LVEF) lower than 40% by Simpson method on echocardiogram performed in the 
last two years. Patients were in New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class II to 
IV despite optimal medical therapy, and were initiated on sacubitril/valsartan by medical 
indication. Optimal medical treatment was considered as the use of ACEI or angiotensin II 
receptor blocker (ARB), beta-blocker and mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist, in target-
doses or in maximum tolerated doses. Sacubitril/valsartan was initiated in a 24/26mg dose 
BID, with up-titration to 49/51mg and 97/103mg BID in two to four weeks if tolerated. 
Whenever it was not possible to increase doses, medical staff kept the dose in use. In case of 
serious adverse events, such as sever hyperkalemia (>6.0mEq/L), acute renal failure or 
symptomatic hypotension attributed to sacubitril/valsartan, the medication was discontinued 
and resumed upon clinical resolution of  the complication. Patients with symptomatic 
hypotension could be managed individually, with attempts to reduce symptoms by simple 
recommendations such as reducing diuretics or other anti-hypertensive drugs, mantaining the 
HFeRF medications whenever possible. 

Patients were excluded if creatine clearance was lower than 30mL/min/1.73m² by 
Modification of Diet in Renal Disease Study (MDRD) formula, hyperkalemia (serum 
potassium higher than 5.5 mEq/L), systolic blood pressure lower than 100mmHg or medical 
history of allergy or angioedema after using valsartan. We also excluded patients that 
interrupted the medication with no medical orientation and no clinical reason for 
discontinuation, and patients that discontinued medical follow-up in the institution for any 
reason.  

Data from medical evaluations and complementary exams were obtained from medical 
registries at admission and after the four-month folllow-up. Data collected included age, 
gender, comorbidities (hypertension, diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, atrial fibrillation and 
pulmonary artery hypertension), etiology of HFrEF, and medications in use (ACEI or ARB, 
beta-blockers, spironolactone, diuretics and anticoagulants). Data referring to study outcomes, 
such as serum potassium, creatinine clearance and blood pressure, were routinely measured 
after admission and throughout follow-up by medical staff. Patients were systematically 
questioned about the occurrence of symptomatic hypotension. Blood pressure was measured 
at least twice in every medical appointment, in both arms, with digital equipment (Omron®), 
after five to ten minutes rest, in sitting position, with the back of the body leaned on the chair, 
legs uncrossed and feet flat on the floor. 

Routine evaluations were done weekly during the first month of medication usage, and every 
15 or 30 days after one month, depending on individual clinical conditions. Laboratory 
assessment was done every 30 days, according to institutional protocol, or within shorter 
intervals if complications occurred. Patients who did not return for appointments were 
contacted by telephone for rescheduling and data collection. 

Clinical events considered as safety outcomes of the study were: symptomatic arterial 
hypotension (systolic blood pressure lower than 90mmHg accompanied by at least one of the 
following symptoms: syncope, pre-syncope, temporary visual blurring or dizziness with no 
other reasons), hyperkalemia (serum potassium higher than 5.5 mEq/L) and acute reduction of 
renal function with creatinine clearance lower than 30mL/min/1.73 m² by MDRD formula or 
reduction of serum creatinine higher than 25% from baseline. Orthostatic hypotension, if 
symptomatic, were equally considered as symptomatic hypotension. Initial and final average 
values of blood pressure, serum potassium and creatinine clearance were compared. Efficacy 
outcomes of LVEF and NYHA functional class at admission and end of follow-up were 
analyzed as exploratory data, with no statistical power to detect differences in such 
comparisons. Clinical hard endpoints were also computed – death and hospitalization due to 
decompensated HFeRF. 

For sample size effect, considering an alfa error of 5% and confidence level of 95%, with an 
estimation of outcomes occurrence of 30% in sample throughout follow-up, we estimated a 
sample size of 24 patients, with 80% power. Due to prediction of loss of follow-up in up to 
15%, we calculated a sample size of 30 patients to be included in the study. 

The study was approved by the institutional Research Ethics Comittee under the number 
2.618.469 and developed under ethical principles of the Helsinki declaration, complying with 
resolution 466/2012. All patients included in the study received the medication from the 
institution at no charge. Sacubitril/valsartan was prescribed as per institutional protocol, with 
no specific interventions from the research team. All patients read, comprehended and signed 
the free informed consent for participation in the study. 

Categorical variables were described as absolute numbers and percentages, and continuous 
variables were described as mean and standard-deviation when they presented normal 
distribution. Comparative analysis were made on Statistical Package for the Social Sciences 
(SPSS) software version 23.0, using the Chi-Square test, the Fisher test and the paired t-
student test, adopting a significance level of 5%. 

Amongst HFrEF oupatients in ambulatory follow-up throuhout the inclusion period, 31 
patients met inclusion criteria and were prescribed sacubitril/valsartan in place of an ACEI or 
an ARB. Five patients were excluded and 26 (83.9%) completed the four-month follow-up, 
compounding the analyzed sample (Figure 1). Etiology of HFrEF was mostly ischemic 
cardiomyopathy or idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy. Wide usage of mortality reducing 
medications was observed at inclusion. Table 1 highlights the baseline clinical characteristics. 
Symptomatic arterial hypotension occurred in 14 patients (53.8%). Five patients (19.2%) 
presented hyperkalemia throughout clinical follow-up. No patients had serum potassium 
dosage above 6.0 mEq/L. Two patients (6.7%) presented reduction of creatinine clearance 
greater than 25% from baseline, and no patients had reduction of creatinine clearance below 
30mL/min/1.73m². No patients needed definitive discontinuation of medication due to blood 
pressure, hyperkalemia or acute renal dysfunction. Temporary discontinuation due to 
symptomatic hypotension was necessary in 11 patients (78.6% of those who presented 
symptomatic hypotension) and due to hyperkalemia in five patients (100% of those who 
presented hyperkalemia). No patients needed to discontinue medication, even temporarily, 
due to acute renal dysfunction. Initial and final mean values of systolic and diastolic blood 
pressure, serum potassium and creatinine clearance are described in Table 2. Among patients 
who needed to interrupt sacubitril/valsartan by medical indication, the average number of 
days in use of maximum dose was 78.8 days in those who presented symptomatic 
hypotension versus 77.4 days in those who did not (p=0.48), and 73.0 days in those who 
presented hyperkalemia versus 78.9 days in those who did not (p=0.65). 

Mean LVEF on admission and end of follow-up was respectively 29.9 ± 7.7% and 34.0 ± 
7.8% (p=0.04). Mean NYHA functional class at both moments was 2.1 ± 0.5 and 1.1 ± 0.3 
(p=0.01). Twenty-two patients (84.6%) improved functional class, and 21 (80.8%) were on 
functional class I at the end of follow-up. No patients presented worsening NYHA functional 
class. One death (3.8%) and one hospitalization due to decompensated HFrEF (3.8%) 
occurred throughout follow-up. 

As a recently-approved medication that is still being incorporated in therapeutic arsenal of 
HFrEF in Brazil, there is paucity of real-world safety studies for sacubitril/valsartan in 
Brazilian population. In our sample, composed of refractory HFrEF patients on optimal 
medical therapy, the occurrence of symptomatic hypotension was high, although with good 
clinical control through simple medical end behavioral management in most cases. We also 
observed, in lower extent, hyperkalemia and reduction of renal function, both with no 
significant clinical repercussion. 

Sacubitril/valsartan promotes important vasodilation, once it inhibits degradation of 
natriuretic peptides, leading to increased natriuresis, diuresis and systemic vasodilation.14 In 
PARADIGM-HF, group sacubitril/valsartan had significant reduction of blood pressure after 
eight months when compared to group enalapril. Symptomatic hypotension occurred in 14.0% 
of patients on sacubitril/valsartan and in 9.2% of patients on ACEI (p<0.001).10 In a French 
pharmacovigilance study, arterial hypotension was also the main side-effect of 
sacubitril/valsartan, affecting 18% of patients on use of medication.15 In our study, more than 
half of patients on  sacubitril/valsartan presented symptomatic hypotension whenever 
questioned. Nevertheless, no patients needed to interrupt the medication definitively, and the 
presence of symptoms did not cause reduction of days in use of target-dose. We attributed the 
higher occurrence of this side-effect in our study due to frequent clinical monitoring, with 
active investigation during medical appointments by questioning symptoms. Dealing with a 
drug that was recently inserted in clinical practice, this approach was embraced in order to 
reduce possible serious adverse events during follow-up. Methods of questioning and 
interviewing might have influenced theses results, since a number of HFrEF patients often  
tolerate hypotension with no relevant symptoms. When questioned, these might have 
confirmed symptoms, increasing the report of this outcome. 

The occurrence of hyperkalemia and plasmatic elevation of nitrogenous compounds is 
common during natural history of HFrEF, especially during decompensating episodes.16,17  In 
the PIONEER-HF study, the incidence of hyperkalemia in hospitalized patients was 11.6% in 
those who initiated sacubitril/valsartan versus 9.3% in those who received enalapril (relative 
risk 1.25; 95% confidence interval 0.84-1.84).18 Even in outpatients, mainly in those with 
associated chronic kidney disease, the risk of hyperkalemia is higher.12 Advanced age, male 
gender, baseline hyperkalemia, diabetes and blockage of renin-angiotensin-aldosterone 
system (RAAS) are predisposing factors for hyperkalemia.19 The last one is an integrant part 
of optimal medical therapy, once the use of mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists reduces the 
risk of death in HFrEF significantly.20,21 Our study showed a mild increase in average serum 
potassium, not carrying higher risk of serious outcomes such as cardiac arrythmias and, 
therefore, interruption of medication. Noteworthy, it is not recommended to initiate 
spironolactone if baseline creatinine level is higher than 2.5mg/dl or if serum potassium is 
higher than 5.0mEq/L.11 Once spironolactone is initiated, close monitoring of serum 
potassium and creatinine is necessary.11  Interruption criteria include serum potassium dosage 
higher than 6.0mEq/L or serum creatinine higher than 3.5mg/dl. For potassium dosages 
between 5.6 and 6.0mEq/L, or creatinine between 2.5 and 3.5mEq/L, dose reduction and 
frequent laboratory monitoring are recommended.12 

RAAS blockage can initially cause hemodynamic renal alterations, although not promoting 
severe worsening of glomerular filtration.22 Yet, strict observation is necessary, since multiple 
mechanisms of reducing glomerular filtration may exist in the association between cardiac 
and renal dysfunction.23,24 In PARADIGM-HF, no differences of renal function were 
observed between groups sacubitril/valsartan and enalapril (2.2% versus 2.6%; relative risk 
0.86; 95% confidence interval 0.65-1.13; p=0.28).10 According to these findings concerning 
safety of sacubitril/valsartan, the drug does not seem to impact renal function negatively, 
despite the high frequency of symptomatic hypotension. Equally important to note, patients 
with creatinine clearance <30mL/min/1.73m² were excluded, thus the safety profile of the 
medication in this population remains unknown. 

Recent therapeutic innovations have been described for HFrEF with improving survival, 
which was not seen for years in clinical trials.10,25-27 Sacubitril/valsartan represents a new 
pharmacological option in HFrEF, capable of reducing mortality in 16%, cardiovascular 
mortality in 20%, and hospitalizations due to HFrEF in 21%.10 With clinically relevant net 
benefit and favourable safety profile as shown in real-world studies, sacubitril/valsartan must 
be included in the frontline therapeutic arsenal of HFrEF. Tolerability issues seem to lay 
mostly on symptomatic hypotension, a less critical event that can generally be managed with 
reduction or interruption of diuretics, demystification of water restriction, and postural and 
behavioral education. However, it is important to address local and regional individual data, 
since ethnical and body constitution differences can interfere on pharmacological tolerance. 
Thus, focus on therapeutic adherence and administration of mortality-reducing drugs may can 
play its role to prolong life and improve quality of life in patients with HFrEF. 

Although relevant in our population, our study has limitations, especially those related to the 
small sample size. Despite demonstrating significant clinical benefit related to LVEF and 
NYHA functional class on follow-up, this study did not have sufficient power for this efficacy 
analysis. Besides, the study was conducted in a HFrEF specialized center located in a medical 
teaching institution, with major initiatives to promote higher therapeutic adherence, such as 
continuous education, family meetings and frequent medical appointments. Then, these 
results must be regarded carefully, since most national public institutions lack these resources 
and protocols and might have higher rates of drug interruption. 

Sacubitril/valsartan demonstrated to be safe in Brazilian clinical practice, in a high-risk and 
refractory group of patients with HFrEF treated in a specialized ambulatory service. 
Symptomatic aterial hypotension was mentioned at some moment of follow-up by more than 
half of included patients. Nevertheless, definitive drug interruption was not necessary in any 
cases. Hyperkalemia and worsening of renal function were less frequent adverse outcomes. 

Knowing adverse effects of medications used for HFrEF is a major concern for 
multidisciplinary teams to provide timely actions and aggressive, yet safe, treatments. Finally, 
enabling the use of survival-improving medications such as sacubitril/valsartan is one of the 
primary challenges in clinical management of patients with HFrEF. 
