This study was partially financed by the Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Education Personnel from Brazil, Finance Code 001. Funder role: the funding agency did not interfere with the study design, data collection analysis or interpretation, writing of the report, nor the decision to submit the article for publication. 

Aims and objectives: To map and synthesize the existing literature on topical therapies for Malignant Fungating Wounds  pain management and the gaps involved. 

Background: Most cancer patients with Malignant Fungating Wounds suffer from wound-related pain, affecting their quality of life. Unfortunately, even though pain is a relevant symptom in cancer and palliative care, little is currently known about topical treatments' availability and impact on pain management. 

Design: A scoping review following JBI® methodology 

Methods: Searches were performed in CINAHL, LILACS, Embase, Web of Science, PubMed, Cochrane, NICE, Scopus, JBISRIR, and gray literature, in English, Portuguese and Spanish, with no time limit. Two authors independently reviewed all citations and a third was called in case of divergence, and studies in adults with Malignant Fungal Wounds reporting topical pain interventions were included. In addition, a data extraction tool for synthesis and thematic analysis was developed. This study followed the PRISMA-ScR Checklist. 

Results: 70 publications were selected from 796 records retrieved from databases. The studies mainly included non-systematic reviews and case studies with only six clinical trials. According to the narrative synthesis, twenty therapies were identified, including the use of wound dressings (58.6%), analgesic drugs (55.7%), topical antimicrobials (25.7%), skin barriers (15.7%), cryotherapy (5.7%), and Negative Pressure Wound Therapy (4.3%). Therapies were recommended to be applied to the wound bed or the periwound skin. In 68.5% of the studies, a standardized assessment for pain was not described.  

Conclusions: Topical therapies applied to Malignant Fungating Wounds or periwound areas had been examined for pain management. However, their effectiveness was analyzed in a few interventional studies, indicating the need for further primary studies to inform evidence-based practice.  

Implication for Practice: Highlighted topical therapies for clinical practice consideration are opioids, anesthetics, and antimicrobials, with positive results described in randomized clinical trials.  

This study did not include patients.  

What does this paper contribute to the broader global clinical community? 

- Patients with Malignant Fungating Wounds experience physical, mental, social, and spiritual pain, as conceptualized by Cecily Saunders in "total pain". Pain may be related to tumor infiltration and be of a nociceptive, neuropathic origin, caused by moisture-associated periwound skin damage or wound dressing manipulation. 

- Systemic treatments for pain management in patients with cancer ineffectively manage malignant fungating wound-related pain due to its etiopathogenic characteristics and poor superficial tissue perfusion. In addition, there is no clarity about available topical options for pain control in these wounds. 

- This scoping review found 20 potential topical therapies for Malignant Fungating Wound-associated pain, documented mainly in non-systematic reviews, case reports, and a few interventional studies. Eleven studies recommended the use of topical therapies applied to the peri-wound skin that act by promoting a protective barrier. 

- Topical products were categorized as anti-adherent, antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory, absorbent dressings, analgesic drugs (gel based on anesthetic, opioid, and oil with cannabinoids), negative pressure wound therapy or cryotherapy, and careful irrigation and removal of dressings. 

- Most of the included studies (69%) did not formally assess pain using the appropriate tools. 

- This study’s comprehensive mapping of the literature on topical MFW pain therapies highlights different treatments worldwide, opening the door for urgent primary research and evidence-based implementation projects. Furthermore, the results included herein may guide future studies and support the revision of local protocols. 

According to the Globocan 2020 report, one in five people will develop cancer. The report estimated that 19.3 million people across the globe were living with cancer at the time of the publication, and 10 million had died from the disease (Sung et al., 2021). Advancements in cancer diagnosis and treatments have led to prolonged survival time in recent decades (Sung et al., 2021; Tsichlakidou et al., 2019); , putting cancer survivors at risk for chronic complications from the progression of the disease and treatments, including the emergence of Malignant Fungating Wounds (MFWs) (Hoshi et al., 2019; Tilley et al., 2020). 

MFWs are complex chronic wounds that originate from uncontrolled proliferation of infiltrating malignant cells, disrupting skin integrity. Over time, these wounds evolve and deteriorate, becoming more extensive and invasive (Hoshi et al., 2019; Tilley et al., 2020; Young, 2017). Approximately 4% -15% of cancer patients develop this type of injury (Firmino et al., 2020) that predominately involve breasts (62 to 66%), head and neck (24%), and the chest due to the proximity of the compromised tissue to the skin (EONS, 2015; Firmino et al., 2020; Neves Duarte Lisboa, 2016; O'Neill et al., 2022). According to the Haisfield-Wolfe and Baxendale-Cox staging system, people with MFWs in their advanced stages are beleaguered by debilitating symptoms, including odor, exudate, itching, bleeding, and pain (Haisfield-Wolde ME, 1999). These symptoms can present significant challenges to patients, caregivers, and health professionals (Santos & Fuly, 2015; Tilley et al., 2020).  

Pain is the most common concern of all symptoms related to people living with MFWs. However, pain is a subjective experience that is difficult to assess objectively; evaluation relies on self-reported measures (Raja et al., 2020). Therefore, using validated instruments to evaluate pain systematically is essential to monitor and benchmark the efficacy of pain treatment over time (Caraceni & Shkodra, 2019). 

Mechanism involved in MFW-related pain is complex and multifactorial because of the omnipresence of infection due to high local microbial load (Vardhan et al., 2019), irritation of exposed nerve endings (trauma at dressing changes), tumor growth (pressure compressing on body structures), and edema (impaired lymphatic and capillary drainage). In consequence, patients may experience nociceptive, neuropathic, inflammatory, or mixed pain, depending on the trigger (EONS, 2015; Naylor, 2001). 

Current literature regarding topical interventions for the management of MFWs is inconsistent with the use of different topical substances with varying analgesic effects, such as opioids, anti-inflammatory drugs, anesthetics, and non-adherent dressings (EONS, 2015). Topical pain treatment may be preferred over systemic use of medication linked to many devastating side effects. In addition, the bioavailability of systemic pain medication can be unpredictable for controlling MFW-related pain due to altered circulation caused by malignant infiltration (LeBon et al., 2009). 

A previous systematic review examined the efficacy of topical MFW treatments for local infection, odor, and pain. The review included four studies, three randomized controlled trials, and a pre and post-test survey on odor and infection management; In the end, the authors recommended new intervention studies for the control of MFW-related pain (Finlayson et al., 2017a). 

This study aimed to map and synthesize the existing literature on topical therapies for MFW pain management and identify the existing gaps. 

A scoping review was conducted according to the JBI® approach developed to map key concepts, clarify definitions, define boundaries of a subject, summarize information, and describe research and clinical gaps (Peters et al., 2020). Unlike a systemic review that focuses on treatment effectiveness, a scoping review is a rigorous undertaking to conduct a comprehensive search for all the available literature about a subject without stringent methodological restriction.  

The title of this review was recorded in the JBI® database (JBI, 2019). The protocol is on the Open Science Framework (OSF) platform (da Costa Ferreira et al., 2020) and was published in the Journal Wound Care (JWC) (Ferreira et al., 2021). 

This study entailed secondary methodology (review of the literature); therefore, an ethical review was not necessary.  

What types of topical therapies and/or treatments are available for pain management in patients with MFWs? 

This review considered studies of patients who were 18 years of age and above with painful MFWs. 

The key concept of this review was to map any topical therapy for MFW-related pain management. Topical therapy was defined as applying a product to the wound and periwound skin, as previously described (Mayba & Gooderham, 2018). 

The secondary concept was to identify and describe how topical therapies are used for MFW-related pain management and the instruments used to assess pain. 

This study considered all types of care settings for patients with MFWs, such as hospitalization, outpatient and/or home care, long-term care, and palliative care support institutions. 

For this review, we considered all qualitative, quantitative, and review studies describing the use of topical therapies to manage MFW-related pain in adult patients. 

Any study with a qualitative theoretical and methodological framework was considered for qualitative studies. Any experimental (controlled trials with or without randomization, quasi-experimental, before and after) and observational studies (descriptive, cohort, cross-sectional, case, and case series) were considered for quantitative studies. Systematic, non-systematic, meta-analyzes, meta-synthesis, and clinical practice guidelines were considered. In addition, unpublished studies (gray literature) in English, Portuguese, and Spanish without time limits were also considered. 

Searches were performed in three steps: 1. An initial search was done on the MEDLINE and CINAHL databases using the terms "Wounds and Injuries; Neoplasms; Pain Management; Administration, Topical" to identify new keywords. 2. A new search was applied using all keywords and descriptors identified in the included databases. 3. Additionally, with the support of a librarian, a search equation was built for each database. The search strategy for CINAHL (EBSCO) is detailed in Table 1. No time limit was applied in the search equations conducted from 2019 to 2020 which was then updated in March 2022. Finally, an active search in the reference lists of selected studies was performed to identify additional studies of interest. 

CINAHL (EBSCO), LILACS (VHL Regional Portal), Embase, Scopus, Web of Science, Medline (PubMed), Cochrane, NICE, JBISRIR, as well as unpublished studies on the Open Access Scientific Repository (Canada), Canadian Dissertation and Thesis Portal, Tesis Doctorales Database -Teseo (Spain), CAPES Thesis Bank (Brazil), Google Scholar (including Textbooks and Congress Proceedings), and the European Thesis and Dissertation Database-Dart-E. 

After conducting the searches, all identified records were grouped and registered on MendeleyⓇ (Mendeley Ltd., Elsevier, The Netherlands) for management and duplicate removal. Two independent reviewers reviewed titles and abstracts based on the inclusion criteria for evaluation. Potentially relevant documents were retrieved in full text. Two independent reviewers evaluated the full text of the selected citations in detail, based on the inclusion criteria. A third reviewer decided on disagreements between reviewers at any stage of the selection process. 

Two independent reviewers extracted the data using a data extraction tool developed by the authors and previously tested on three articles to assess their adequacy. After the test, we added the variables: "trade name of the therapy," "formulation," and "application form" (Table 2). 

Extracted data included general data regarding the author(s), year of publication, origins, objectives, methods, topical therapies used, and results. In addition, specific data regarding tumor type, staging, wound location and stage, pain evaluation with an assessment tool, pain classification, location and duration of pain, and the use of medication to control wound pain were extracted. The authors of one of the included articles were contacted to request additional data (Ciałkowska-Rysz & Dzierżanowski, 2019). As seen in the methodology of scoping reviews, a critical evaluation of the included articles was not carried out. 

Extracted information from the included articles was summarized using narrative synthesis to delineate all available strategies in the literature, identify possible gaps and limitations in the current knowledge, and guide future primary studies that can respond to the challenges of topical MFW-related pain management.  

According to the objectives and the review question, the narrative synthesis is presented in suitable key conceptual categories and specific subgroups created after the data extraction process. The synthesis followed the guidelines of the EQUATOR checklist called the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses extension for Scoping Reviews (PRISMA-ScR) (Supplementary File 1) (Tricco et al., 2018). Results were categorized and refined to describe the characteristics of the interventions using figures and tables. 

Among the 796 identified studies, 564 articles did not meet the inclusion criteria. Eighty-seven were considered eligible for a full-text reading after excluding 145 duplicates, from which 24 were further discarded (Supplementary Table 3) as they did not meet the inclusion criteria.  

After actively searching the references of the included articles, seven extra papers were added, thus totaling 70 articles for this scoping review analysis (Figure 1).  

The selected studies presented the following characteristics: 54 (88.6%) were published in English, four (5.7%) in Portuguese, and four (5.7%) in Spanish. England was the country with the largest number of publications (18 / 24.3%), followed by the USA (16 / 22.9%). Twenty-two studies (31.4%) were published in the last seven years (2015-2022). Nurses were the professional category that most published on the topic (54 / 77.1%), followed by physicians (15 / 24.1%) and pharmacists (1 / 1.4%). 

Regarding the types of studies, 32 (45.7%) were non-systematic literature reviews, 20 (28.5%) case studies, and 18 (25.8%) the other methodologies (control trials, systematic reviews, cohorts, guidelines, and surveys) as detailed in the Table 4. Only seven MFW studies (10%) included pain management as a primary outcome. Study sample sizes ranged from 1 to 60 patients. 

Finally, 20 proposals were identified for the topical management of MFW-related pain. These are presented according to two general categories: Topical therapies applied in the wound and Topical therapies applied to periwound skin. Figure 2 shows the distribution of topical therapies in the 70 studies. Figure 3 summarizes the identified topical therapies grouped by MFW-derived sources of pain and the main research gaps.  

The topical therapies identified in this review included Analgesic Drugs, Antimicrobial Substances, Dressings, Negative Pressure Wound Therapy, and Cryotherapy. In addition, some studies presented more than one therapy, proposing an integrated approach for MFW-related pain management.  

This category included: Non-adherent dressings, Hydrogel, Absorbent dressings, and Anti-inflammatory dressings.  

Twenty-six (37.1%) articles proposed non-adherent dressings for MFW-related pain management. The studies were non-systematic reviews (65.3%), case studies (19.8%), randomized clinical trials (3.8%), a guideline (3.8%), prospective cohorts (3.8%), and a Survey (3.8%). Twenty-five studies (35.7%) did not include pain management as a primary objective. All studies used dressings with other therapies such as opioids, anesthetics, and antiseptics. None of the studies mentioned a standardized way of using them or described the pain-related specific results from non-adherent dressings alone.  

Eleven out of the 70 studies (15.7%) recommended using hydrogels to manage MFW-related pain. The studies included non-systematic reviews (54.5%), case studies (36.3%), and systematic reviews (9.2%). Eight (72.7%) studies discussed hydrogel perfunctorily as an optional dressing for these patients to reduce pain by maintaining a moist wound environment. Discussions were brief without substantiation. The hydrogel was also mentioned as a vehicle to deliver other active substances such as opioids, anesthetics, and antibiotics in the included studies. None of the studies presented a standardized way of using this type of dressing, and no results were presented.  Ten (14.2%) studies used absorbent dressings to manage MFW-related pain. The studies included non-systematic reviews (50%), case studies (20%), a guideline (10%), randomized clinical trials (10%), and a survey (10%). None (90%) of the studies aimed to test the absorbent dressing to control MFW-related pain. Some studies only cite them as a dressing option for patients with pain related to high exudate absorption, minimizing the possible dermatitis related-pain derived from periwound moisture. In all studies, these dressings are associated with other therapies such as opioids, anesthetics, and antiseptics. No study mentions a standardized way of using the dressings or of displaying their results on pain management without being combined with other products. 

Anti-inflammatory dressings include absorbent polyurethane foam containing 0.5 mg/cm2 of Ibuprofen homogeneously distributed throughout the foam matrix and a cream with essential oils. 

Eight (10%) out of 70 studies suggested using foam with Ibuprofen dressing as a therapy for MFW pain management. The studies were of the non-systematic reviews (87.5%) and survey (12.5%) types. None of the studies focused on evaluating the foam with Ibuprofen for MFW-related pain management, but only cited it as a dressing option for these patients. In addition, no study mentioned how to use the dressing or the results of its use. 

Only one case study (1.4%) published in 2014 (Stringer et al., 2014) evaluated the use of a cream with essential oils in 12 patients (mostly women with breast cancer with ages between 40 and 81 years) for MFW symptoms. The cream contained 3% essential oils (without specifying ingredients). Without standardizing the dressings and reporting the cream's form and several applications on the wounds, the authors mentioned that six patients reported pain improvement (reducing the maximum score to zero on a Likert scale). 

Topical opioids, topical anesthetics, and Medicinal Cannabis were categorized within analgesic drugs.  

Thirty-one (44.2%) studies examined opioids applied topically to the wound bed to control MFW-related pain. The studies included non-systematic reviews (67.7%), case studies (16.1%), randomized clinical trials (.06%) (including a letter to the editor in which data from an unfinished trial was reported), guidelines (.03%), prospective cohorts (.03%) and systematic reviews (.03%). Of these 31 studies, just under a half mentioned specific opioids to treat MFW-related pain, specifically suggesting Morphine. Meanwhile, two of them also mentioned Oxycodone without describing its preparation or ways of applying these drugs, as shown in Table 5. 

Regarding analgesic drugs, 20 (28.5%) studies proposed using topical anesthetics to manage MFW-related pain. The studies were non-systematic reviews (75%), case studies (5%), randomized clinical trials (5%), guidelines (5%), prospective cohorts (5%), and surveys (5%). Nine studies (45%) presented dosages and application guidelines for various topical anesthetics that are grouped and detailed in Table 6. Additionally, 11 (55%) mention using lidocaine, prilocaine, benzocaine, and a tricyclic anesthetic, without describing the formulation or mode of use. 

Only one case study (1.4%) (Maida, 2017) proposed using medicinal cannabis as topical and vaporized oil as part of the MFW pain management armamentarium. The case focused on a 44-year-old male patient diagnosed with squamous cell cancer in the oral cavity, resulting in a MFW on the right hemiface. The patient rated the pain between 9 and 10/10 at baseline, and treatment included intravenous analgesia. After receiving the vaporized medicinal cannabis every 2 to 4 hours, and before changing the dressing or digitally applying and spreading 1-2 ml of the oil throughout the wound, externally and intra-orally, the patient reported significant pain relief, with his pain score was reduced to 3 and 4, this improvement allowed for a modification of the analgesic regimen. This is the first case report demonstrating the potential of topical medicinal cannabis for effective MFW pain management. 

This scoping review categorized antimicrobial substances as topical antimicrobials, honey, and antiseptics. We consider any implications of antimicrobial substances if they present the ability to kill or inhibit the growth and development of a microorganism (bacteria, fungi, and viruses), including antibiotics, antiseptics, and disinfectants. 

Ten (14.2%) studies proposed using topical antimicrobials such as Metronidazole, Nanocrystalline Silver, and Silver Sulfadiazine to manage MFW-related pain. These studies were case studies (40%), randomized clinical trials (20%), non-systematic reviews (10%), retrospective cohorts (10%), systematic reviews (10%), and surveys (10%). Six (60%) reported using antimicrobials, although pain was not their main focus, but did not present the form of use or the outcomes. 

One randomized clinical trial (Lund-Nielsen et al., 2011) included in a systematic review (Adderley & Holt, 2014) reported positive results when using antimicrobials to control MFW odor, exudate, and pain. Three studies tested antimicrobials to manage MFW symptoms, including pain. Two were randomized clinical trials, and one was a retrospective cohort that included 192 patients with MFWs, mainly women aged between 47 and 90 years and primarily with breast cancer. Of these clinical trials, two used a verbal numeric scale and a visual analog scale, demonstrating improvement in pain; the third found no statistically significant effect on the pain outcome (Table 7). 

Five (7%) articles reported topical honey as a therapy for MFW-related pain management. 

None of the studies focused on pain management but on the general control of MFW symptoms, including pain. Two reviews (systematic and non-systematic) (Adderley & Holt, 2014; Praptiwi, 2017) included two primary studies in which authors obtained positive effects of using honey to control MFW odor, exudate, and pain. These studies analyzed 384 patients, mainly women, with an average age of 44 to 90 years, primarily with breast tumors. A visual analog scale was used just in one of the studies (Lund-Nielsen et al., 2011). (Table 8).  

Only three (4%) studies proposed topical antiseptics such as Polyhexamethylene Biguanide, Octenidine, and other non-specified degerming agents for MFW pain management. The studies included randomized clinical trials (66.6%) and non-systematic reviews (33.4%). None of the studies had pain control as the primary aim but the control of general symptoms, including pain. The three studies analyzed 54 patients, predominantly women, between 24 and 92 years old, with primary tumors, mainly of the breast. Pain was assessed using verbal classification and visual analog scales in two of the studies. The use of topical antiseptics resulted in pain improvement in two studies and no changes in pain intensity scores in one study (Table 9). 

Three (4%) studies elucidated the use of Negative Pressure Wound Therapy (NPWT) to manage MFW-related pain. The studies were case studies (66.6%) and non-systematic reviews (33.4%). None of the studies focused primarily on pain management but on the general direction of MFW-associated symptoms; however, one of the studies did not mention the main objective. These studies analyzed data from six patients, women aged 56 to 62, with different primary tumors (sarcomas, breast cancer, melanoma, and sigmoid cancer). There was no quantitative or qualitative assessment of pain in any of the studies. Nevertheless, the studies reported an improvement in odor, exudate, and pain, thus impacting patients' quality of life (Table 10). 

In four studies (5%), topical cryotherapy was applied to control MFW-related pain without this being the primary focus, but rather the management of symptoms which included pain. The studies were non-systematic reviews (50%), surveys (25%), and guidelines (25%). The studies did not show the forms of use or results.  

Eleven (15.7%) studies discussed therapies for pain management in the periwound skin area. The studies were non-systematic reviews (63.7%), case studies (18.1%), guidelines (9.1%), and surveys (9.1%). The proposed therapies were zinc oxide (ointment and cream), silicone, dimethicone, petrolatum, acrylate and cyanoacrylate, hydrocolloid (paste and powder), and vitamin-rich ointment (A and D), all of which are part of pain-control protocols. All studies were coordinated by nurses and published in journals on wounds, palliative care, oncology, and general nursing. Two studies reported assessing pain, and one mentioned a Visual Analog Scale as the instrument used to measure pain. Positive results are reported, however, not further described (Table 11).  

The dressing application and removal technique for MFW-related pain management was not categorized as a topical therapy. However, several studies alluded to various dressing application techniques and conditions and their effect on pain. Twenty-one (30%) studies proposed procedures related to the dressing technique to minimize pain. The studies were non-systematic reviews (66%), guidelines (14%), randomized clinical trials (10%), a case study (5%), and a survey (5%). In general, the authors proposed cleaning the wound with an appropriately warm solution, applying and removing dressings carefully, refraining from debridement due to the risk of bleeding, maintaining a moist environment in the wound bed, cleaning with soap with an appropriate pH, reducing the frequency of dressing changes, and providing analgesia before applying the dressing. 

This scoping review aimed to map and examine the literature available on topical MFW-related pain management, considering its relevance for oncology and palliative care clinicians. The synthesis of this body of literature may provide insights into treatments which could enhance quality-of-life, especially for patients with terminal cancer (Schmidt et al., 2020). This study is the first scoping review developed in its field to contribute to researchers seeking to advance research trends and elucidate the gaps in this field.  

Cancer patients experience multiple symptoms, including pain that involves neurophysiological and affective components (Wood, 2021). Pain can be exacerbated, amplified, and contribute to loss of body functions, grief, a sense of doom, and other feelings, including anxiety, fear, and uncertainty within this population (Brant, 2017). 

We reviewed 70 studies that explored 20 topical therapies such as dressings with different mechanisms of action, analgesic drugs, and antimicrobial substances, among others, with promising results to mitigate pain. However, only 31.4% of the studies applied standardized pain assessment tools: Visual Analogue Scale, Numerical Verbal Scale, McGill's Questionnaire, and the assessment by categories (no pain, weak, moderate, and severe). In addition, in a survey evaluating attitudes and knowledge about pain assessment and treatment among health care providers, demonstrated that nurses possessed a lower level of knowledge about pain assessment and management (Nuseir et al., 2016). 

In this review, the 20 topical treatments identified were grouped into five categories: dressings, analgesic drugs, antimicrobial substances, negative pressure therapy, and cryotherapy, with various products. 

Studies on the use of dressings predominated as a proposal for topical therapy for MFW-related pain management. The treatment of pain that arises from changing dressings due to the adhesion of the product to the wound bed and the subsequent difficulty of removing it was highlighted. This demonstrates the benefits of protecting friable tissue in the wound bed in a malignant fungating wound. (Woo et al., 2015; Woo & Sibbald, 2010). 

Non-adherent dressings, such as polyurethane foam, silicone foams, silicone hydrocellular foam, fibers, and hydrofibers, were recommended for promoting painless removal. However, there is still a need to clarify the best non-adherent therapy applied to MFWs due to changes in circulation and the presence of non-viable tissue. Absorbent dressings were also mentioned for MFW-related pain management, including the Pain of periwound dermatitis caused by excessive MFW exudation and the irritating components present in the exudate (Gozzo et al., 2014; Tamai et al., 2016a).  

The use of a non-adherent and absorbent polyurethane foam covered with Ibuprofen was mentioned in 11% of the studies with positive results regarding MFW pain control. This was not surprising since this drug introduces anti-inflammatory and analgesic properties into the wound bed. However, new studies with the primary objective of evaluating this therapy to control MFW-related pain with an adequate description of the methodology would allow for a safer indication, considering its additional properties of nonadherence and absorbency (Gottrup et al., 2008). 

Topical opioids were another option. Opioid receptors are present in the peripheral nervous system, synthesized in the dorsal root ganglia, transported axonally to the peripheral terminals, and detectable after peripheral injuries and inflammation. An inflammatory process developed in the MFW beds could explain pain improvement using opioids (Vardhan et al., 2019). Future studies should consider more potent opioids such as fentanyl (Wang et al., 2017). 

Medical cannabis was also explored as a potential analgesic drug in a case study that reported a reduction in MFW-related pain. Cannabinoids are substances derived from the Cannabis sativa plant. The expression and identification of cannabinoid receptors in peripheral neurons has contributed to studies exploring topical formulations based on cannabinoids. In animals, alone or in association with other analgesics, the analgesic effect of cannabinoids has been demonstrated and has even attributed to an increased in the antinociceptive effects of Morphine (Maida et al., 2021; Nielsen et al., 2017). 

Antimicrobial substances, including honey, Octenidine, polyhexanide, and metronidazole, showed promising results in MFW-related pain management through decreasing local microbial load which is responsible for triggering pain as a classic indicator of infection (Swanson & Angel, 2022). In addition, the progressive nature of cancer makes MFWs sensitive to microbial growth, mainly with anaerobic microorganisms causing wound odor, exudate, and pain. Thus, the control of the microbial burden of MFWs through topical antimicrobial substances can explain the reduction of exudate, odor, and pain (Vardhan et al., 2019 ; Villela-Castro et al. 2018; Finlayson et al., 2017b;). 

Case studies included in this review used NPWT to manage symptoms of MFWs and reported favorable results, increasing patients' quality of life. Although NPWT is contraindicated for MFWs, this therapy should be adequately studied in palliative care (Riot et al., 2015). Negative pressure creates a closed environment for the wound, thereby controlling moisture, removing excess exudate, reducing microbial load, promoting perfusion, stimulating mitosis, and granulation tissue formation. These latter actions are contraindicated for in patients with MFWs, because mitosis is not desired and granulation is not the primary objective for wound management (Cai et al., 2017). Furthermore, malignant cells can induce the formation of new blood vessels, which are friable, requiring careful evaluation and caution when using NPWT on MFWs due to the risk of bleeding (Firmino et al., 2021). 

Cryotherapy promotes cold-induced vasoconstriction and causes muscle spasms that slow down nerve conduction, reducing pain (Farah et al., 2021). However, no primary studies have been found evaluating the effectiveness of cryotherapy in the past five years. Therefore, it is not included in the guideline for patients with MFWs published by the European Oncology Nursing Society (EONS, 2015). The lack of primary studies in cryotherapy may be the result of the development of new therapies and coverage for pain in MFW which demonstrate greater effectiveness and ease of application. 

Wound-related pain is not limited to the wound bed area and may involve periwound skin. MFWs can evolve with high exudation, irritating to the periwound skin, and are characterized by inflammation with or without erosion, itching, pain, and potential skin damage secondary to infection (Tamai et al., 2016b). Due to constant moisture, periwound protection is recommended using a suitable barrier product that can repel excess moisture, protecting the skin from consequent damage (LeBlanc et al., 2021). However, there are few studies on using these products in patients with MFWs. 

Patients often experience pain during dressing changes. Careful application and removal, irrigation techniques, and the proper decision on the frequency of dressing changes can be easily modified to contribute to topical pain management (Woo, 2015). 

This review limited the languages for searching articles to Portuguese, English, and Spanish. However, search strategies brought up six articles in languages other than those cited, and they were not included in this review (supplementary table 3).  

This scoping review of the available literature about topical therapies for topical MFW-related pain management included 70 studies with 20 topical therapies categorized as dressings (non-adherent dressing, hydrogel, absorbent dressing, and anti-inflammatory dressing); analgesic drugs (topical opioids, topical anesthetics, medical cannabis); antimicrobial substances (antimicrobials, honey, and antiseptics); cryotherapy; and negative pressure wound therapy. For periwound skin interventions: zinc oxide (ointment and cream), silicone (adhesive remover), dimethicone, petrolatum, acrylate, cyanoacrylate, hydrocolloid (plate and powder), and a vitamin-rich ointment (A and D) were identified. Some technical aspects related to MFW pain management included irrigating with a warm solution, careful application and the removal of the dressing, no debridement, maintaining a moist environment in the wound bed, cleaning with soap with an appropriate pH, reducing the frequency of dressing changes, and applying systemic analgesia before the dressing. However, there is a lack of studies describing the products' mode of use in detail and their effectiveness for evidence-based informed practice. 

Pain was not formally assessed in 68.5% of the studies. However, the following specific pain assessment instruments were mentioned in 22 studies: Visual Analogue Scale, Numerical Verbal Scale, McGill Questionnaire, and assessment by category (no pain, weak, moderate, and severe).  

This scoping review contributed with a systematized summary of the available topical treatments for MFW-related pain management. Topical therapies were identified for considerations in clinical practice, highlighting opioids, anesthetics, and antimicrobials; however, few prospective interventional studies described effectiveness. In addition, none explored cost-effectiveness or cost-benefits, which are relevant aspects for clinical implementation.  

The topical therapies with positive results reported by randomized clinical trials were lidocaine/prilocaine 2.5%, morphine gel 0.2% as analgesics, metronidazole 0.8% solution, and polyhexamethylene biguanide (PHMB) with betaine 0.1% solution, octenidine solution, honey, and silver as antimicrobials. Moreover, the combination of topical therapies on the wound bed, periwound skin, and the application of techniques of dressing change aiming at pain prevention can potentially improve the painful experience in people with MFWs (Figure 3).  

This review did not critically appraise the methodologies and studies’ qualities due to the aims and method of a scoping review; consequently, the comments on the clinical practice should be considered carefully.  