Aims: This pilot study aimed to describe the majority and minority microbiota of saliva from individuals with 
advanced periodontitis, with or without type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D), correlating the relative abundance of 
microorganisms with clinical parameters. 

Material/Methods: Six individuals diagnosed with periodontitis were included and classified according to their 
diagnosis of T2D. Salivary pH, number of teeth with active caries lesions, number of remaining teeth, 
periodontal and glycemic parameters were evaluated. V4 region amplicons of the 16S rRNA from salivary 
DNA were sequenced at Ion PGM. Amplicon sequence variants (ASVs) were compared according to the 
clinical parameters. 

Results: Correlation showed eight low-abundant bacteria significantly correlated with co-variables, either 
positively or negatively. The periodontitis-associated bacteria followed the increasing pH and number of 
remaining teeth.  

Conclusions: This survey provided potential minority microbiota correlations with clinical parameters, such 
as number of remaining teeth, FBG, and salivary pH. The ubiquity of some low abundant microorganisms in 
individuals with advanced periodontitis, exposed or not to type 2 DM, can reveal microbial signatures not yet 
explored. 

Changes in the salivary flow and composition are among the most critical factors for the oral 
microbiota shift. The balance of oral microorganisms can be disrupted, prompting oral diseases due 
to a dysbiosis (1). The salivary secretion is strongly affected by age, medications and hypoglycemia 
(2, 3), the last being particularly habitual in patients with diabetes mellitus (DM). This common 
condition has an established impact on periodontitis, but its relative importance in other oral diseases 
has been subject to considerable discussion (4, 5). Extensive research has shown that DM leads not 
only to salivary dysfunctions in terms of flow rates (hyposalivation) (3, 6-9), but also to significant 
changes in the composition of saliva that is secreted by the salivary glands, increasing the salivary 
glucose levels (10). 

There is strong evidence demonstrating that glycemic control plays a crucial role in regulating 
the periodontal-associated subgingival biofilm (11-14). A potential impact of DM on the salivary 
microbiome has also been investigated (15-18). Correlations of the salivary microbiome with 
periodontitis and DM-related parameters were recently performed (19), and significant microbial 
composition changes were observed. However, those studies neither distinguish the severity of 
periodontitis nor correlate the microbiota to clinical oral conditions other than periodontal-related 
ones. Furthermore, research on the DM-associated salivary microbiome has mainly been restricted to 
the identification of most abundant microbiota associated with health or disease, overlooking the low-
abundant microbiota. We believe that this strategy could cause a misunderstanding of whole 
environment as metabolic functions exerted by low-abundant microorganisms can be linked the 
dysbiotic microhabitats (20).  

Since the salivary microbiome can reflect the entire oral microenvironment, saliva can be a 
more representative sample for searching the shifts to dysbiosis. By studying the salivary fluid of 
individuals with DM, oral manifestations of DM other than periodontitis affect the microbial 
composition can be better explored. The significant salivary dysfunctions in individuals with DM can 
be associated with variations in its microbiome. Goodson et al. evaluated changes in abundance of 
some bacterial species in the saliva of adolescents with high concentrations of salivary glucose, 
showing that the higher the salivary glucose the lower the pH of the saliva (21). As glucose is a well-
known energy source for many oral bacteria, changes in its concentration may have a pivotal role in 
the salivary microbiome leading to reduced overall bacterial diversity and significant changes in the 
relative bacterial frequencies, favouring acidic bacterial species.  

This pilot study aimed to describe the majority and minority microbiota of saliva from 
individuals with advanced periodontitis, with or without type 2 DM (T2D), correlating the relative 
abundance of organisms with the salivary pH, the number of teeth with active caries lesions, the 
number of remaining teeth and the periodontal and glycemic parameters.              

This study was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of the School of Health Sciences 
of the University of Brasília (process number 87962818.4.0000.0030) in accordance with the 
declaration of Helsinki. All patients signed a formal consent form and received basic dental treatment. 

A pilot study enrolled six individuals diagnosed with periodontitis according to a New 
Classification of Periodontal Disease (22) at the “Diabetes dental clinic” at the University Hospital 
of Brasília. Patients were recruited and the data collected from August 2018 to March 2019.  

To be included, individuals should have age ≥30 years and at least two teeth with 
interproximal insertion loss ≥ 3mm. Exclusion criteria comprised DM complications and severe 
systemic comorbidities; transplanted patients; a positive history of epilepsy; a history of radiotherapy 
in the head and neck regions; and chemotherapy treatment prior to 3 months. DM status was 
established by a reported medical diagnosis of DM type 2 (T2D) and by the use of either insulin or 
other oral hypoglycemic medications. Six patients with periodontal disease were included in the 
present study and were divided according to the medical condition, as follows: three patients were 
not previously diagnosed with DM (P21, P10 e P2) and three had been previously diagnosed with 
DM (DMP14, DMP27 e DMP33).  

Trained examiners evaluated the periodontal status. The periodontal parameters such as 
probing depth, clinical attachment loss and bleeding on probing (BOP) were recorded using a 
Williams-type periodontal probe (Hu-Friedy MFG. Co. Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). The number of 
remaining teeth was counted by visual inspection. The number of teeth with either non-cavitated or 
cavitated caries lesions was also recorded, including the classification of lesion activity (23) by 
trained and calibrated examiners (weighted Kappa>0.7). 

Participants were also tested regarding their fasting blood glucose (FBG) levels within three 
months before salivary collection (Sabin laboratories, Brasília, Brazil). 

Stimulated and passive salivary flow collects were performed in the morning (8-10 am) to 
minimize the effect of circadian rhythms. Individuals were asked to refrain from drinking, eating, and 
performing physical activities at least two hours before salivary collection (17). The collection time 
by passive drooling was 5 minutes. After collection, the unstimulated saliva was aliquoted (500μL) 
into sterile DNAse and RNAse free microtubes and stored at -20oC until further DNA extraction and 
sequencing. The suspension was then centrifuged for 30 seconds at 10,000 rpm and the supernatant 
discarded. 

The salivary pH and buffer capacity were tested in the stimulated saliva. After a minute of 
chewing a rubber device, the total volume of stimulated saliva was collected for 5 minutes by passive 
drool to a plastic container. The pH was checked using an indicator strip. Buffer capacity was assessed 
after adding 3mL of 0.005M hydrochloric acids for every 1mL of stimulated saliva. After 2 minutes, 
the pH was measured, considering a low buffering capacity when the pH values were less than 4.0. 

Extraction of the total DNA was performed following the protocol established by Smalla et 
al. (24). The protocol of the DNA amplification of the 16S rRNA gene using the universal primers 
F515/R806 was described elsewhere (25). Briefly, approximately 10ng of genomic DNA was added 
into a 50-μL PCR mixture, including a 1U Platinum Taq DNA polymerase (Tm 52 °C).   

After the amplicons were purified using Agencount AMPure Beads (Beckman Coulter), a 
library construction was performed as described in the Ion Plus Fragment Library from an 
initial amount of 100ng of DNA. Sequencing was conducted on an Ion PGM System (Thermo Fisher) 
using an Ion 316 chip, following the manufacturer’s instructions. 

The 16S rRNA gene reads were submitted to the DADA2 (26) for a single read dataset of 
amplicon sequence variants (ASVs), a more stringent pipeline to identify low abundant 
microorganisms. Reads were filtered by quality and size, and error rates were estimated. Singletons 
were identified and removed during dereplication. Chimeras were removed, and taxonomy was 
assigned using the Silva v.132 database (27). ASVs assigned to Eukaryote, Chloroplast, or 
Mitochondria were removed for further analysis. The sequences were deposited at the National 
Biotechnology Information Center (NCBI) under the BioProject PRJNA558499. 

Mann-Whitney test was applied to compare clinical parameters between groups after 
confirming the non-parametric condition of the data (SPSS software version 25.0 for Mac; SPSS Inc., 
Chicago, IL, USA). The values per ASVs were summed per phyla and then the average was calculated 
by the clinical characteristics. A metadata table was done with the clinical characteristics of the 
individuals, including salivary pH, number of active caries lesions, number of teeth, FBG, the 
proportion of sites with BOP, and proportion of insertion loss >5mm.  Spearman correlation was used 
to compare ASVs relative abundance (RA) with these metadata. The saliva microbiome of individuals 
was also grouped according to clinical characteristics for a descriptive analysis. Mean and standard 
deviation were calculated for the clinical variables. The significance level considered was p <0.05. 

According to the extension of periodontal disease, all patients had generalized periodontitis, 
except the individual DMP33 that presented localized periodontitis. Two patients (DMP27 and P10) 
were diagnosed as periodontitis stage IV and four patients (DMP14, P2, P21, DMP33) as periodontitis 
stage III. Only one individual diagnosed with DM presented uncontrolled levels of blood glucose 
(369 ml/dl). Subjects without a diagnosis of DM had a borderline FBG level (~100 ml/dl). 

Individuals with both periodontitis and DM (named as DMP group) were older than those 
presenting periodontitis and no DM (named as P group). The salivary pH in individuals with the 
diagnosis of DM ranged from pH=7-8, while in P it ranged from pH=6-7. The number of remaining 
teeth, the salivary pH, buffering capacity, and the number of teeth with active caries were similar 
between individuals from both groups (p>0.05). The proportion of sites with BOP and the proportion 
of teeth with clinical attachment loss >5mm were high and similar in both groups (Table 1).  
3.2. Sequencing output and the relative abundance of the microbiota 
A total of 252,964 reads were generated from saliva samples and 116,935 qualified reads were 
distributed in 442 ASVs. After screening and optimization, 332 ASVs remained for further analysis, 
and combined into 117 OTUs, of which two out of them were assigned to archaea. Figure 1 shows 
the relative abundance of the majority microbiota (ASVs ≥1%), representing more than 99% of the 
total sequences. At the phylum level (1A), the predominance of Firmicutes was observed in both 
groups; however, saliva of individuals with a diagnosis of DM (DMP group) were enriched with 
Bacteroidetes and Proteobacteria. In individuals with periodontitis but no DM, a tendency of 
enrichment of Actinobacteria, Fusobacteria and Spirochaetes was observed.  

At the genus level (or respective ASV) (1B), the majority microbiota represented 93-94% of 
the whole microbiota in both groups. The salivary microbiome was dominated by the genus 
Streptococcus, representing ~30% of the total microbiota in both groups. The genera Fusobacterium 
(average DMP=6%; P=13%), Porphyromonas (average DMP=7.5%; P=7.8%), and Gemella (average 
DMP=4.7%; P=5.1%) were also highly prevalent in both groups, presenting ≥1% of the total RA 
across all samples. The genus Veillonella presented a higher abundance in patients with a diagnosis 
of DM: >1.5% in all DMP samples (average=2.8%), while in all the P samples, it was <1% 
(average=0.6%). The same pattern was observed for genus Prevotella, which presented an average 
of 5.3% in DMP and only <0.3% across all P group samples. Conversely, Treponema and Tannerella, 
both periodontitis-associated genera, presented low abundance in the DMP group (average 0.03 and 
0.1%, respectively), but higher in the P group (3% and 0.7%, respectively). 

As we considered the ASV, it was possible to analyse the minority microbiota (<1%), 
representing 0.6 and 0.8% of the total relative abundance in the DMP and P, respectively, and 
dominated by phylum Epsilonbacteraeota (Figure 1C). Saliva of the P group was enriched with 
Synergistes. The most striking result was the identification of reads of two groups belonging to the 
domain Archaea, phyla Thaumarchaeota and Euryarchaeota (0.17% and 0.03%, respectively) in a 
single DMP sample (DMP14), which also presented the lowest salivary pH (pH=6) and the highest 
BOP (75%). Although in low abundance, ASVs affiliated to genera never or infrequently described 
in periodontitis were ubiquitous, found in all individuals: Fermentimonas (≥0.2%; same family as 
Porphyromonas 
and 
Tannarela), 
Caldicoprobacter 
(≥0.13%), 
Rikenellaceae 
(≥0.1%), 
Lentimicrobiaceae (≥0.05%), Fastidiosipila (≥0.08%), Alishewanella (≥0.07%), unnamed CK06-06-
Mud-MAS4B-21 (≥0.05%). Solobacterium was found in all DMP samples, with at least 0.1% of 
relative abundance. 

To better explore these findings from the descriptive analysis, a Spearman correlation was 
performed to compare the clinical parameters and the RA of microorganisms (Figure 2). Eight ASVs 
were significantly correlated to clinical variables, either positively or negatively. Interestingly, the 
pattern observed when the variables were grouped was not observed here. Neither the salivary pH 
nor the presence of lesions with caries activity presented significant correlations with the microbial 
composition.  

FBG was positively correlated to Absconditabacteriales (SR1) and Caldicoprobacter and 
negatively correlated to Leptotrichia, Parviromonas, and Balneolaceae; unnamed CK06-06-Mud-
MAS4B-21. Abiotrophia was negative, while Johnsonella was positively correlated to the number of 
remaining teeth. The clinical attachment loss >5mm was positively correlated to the relative 
abundance of the Balneolaceae CK06-06-Mud-MAS4B-21 and Fastidiosipila. Interestingly, none 
comprised the majority microbiota, but Leptotrichia (3 out of 6 samples with 1%), 
Absconditabacteriales (SR1) (a single sample >1%) and Parviromonas (2 out of 6 samples with 1%). 

The CCA triplot showed a contrary direction of the salivary pH and the FBG and the BOP 
(referred to as bleeding index in the figure) and the clinical attachment loss >5mm. The periodontitis-
associated bacteria, Tannarela, Treponema, and Porphyromonas, followed the increasing pH and 
number of remaining teeth (Figure 3). 

To gain insight into the correlation of the salivary microbiome and clinical parameters of 
patients with periodontitis with or without DM, this pilot study analyzing the abundance of microbial 
ASVs commonly found in the oral cavity sites using a next-generation sequencing approach. A core 
microbiome was similar to the ones related to dental biofilms, including Streptococcus, 
Fusobacterium, and Gemella, with some bacteria abundance strongly affected by the diagnosis of 
DM, as expected. However, the molecular survey used here provided a much broader picture of 
overall differences in the minority microbiota. Fermentimonas, Caldicoprobacter, Rikenellaceae, 
Lentimicrobiaceae, Fastidiosipila, Alishewanella, and unnamed CK06-06-Mud-MAS4B-21, were 
ubiquitous and in low abundance. Solobacterium was a low abundant organism associated with the 
presence of DM. The presence of an inflammatory process in the periodontal sites, the salivary pH 
fluctuation, the blood glucose level and the number of remaining teeth reflected intricate competition 
patterns among low abundance microbial populations, as significant correlations were observed 
between clinical parameters and ASVs representing the minority microbiota.  

There has been a renewed interest in the influence of minority organisms in the microbiome 
accompanying dysbiosis, as primary functions can be assigned to minor members in the community. 
Studies of the minority microbiome may reveal unique signatures associated with both periodontal 
and diabetic status and may shed light on the mechanisms of microbial communities and how they 
prompt disease. However, few NGS-based studies has been describing the microbiota in low 
abundance (<1%), and the main reasons are the low detection power and a high chance of inaccuracy 
(20). This problem has been worked around here by using a more robust pipeline against detection 
errors in the data (single-read-based, instead of assembly-based classification), an issue that can be 
expected to be of much higher relevance in low-abundance species than in the high-abundance ones. 
We also observed the ubiquity in conjunction with a characteristic of abundance of taxa. The analysis 
of the low abundant organisms is not a search for a ‘guilty’, but a study on how some species 
metabolism can influence (or be impacted by) the transition from health to disease. Interestingly, 
none of the organisms correlated with clinical parameters comprised the majority microbiota, but 
Leptotrichia (3 out of 6 samples with 1%), SR1 (a single sample >1%) and Parviromonas (2 out of 6 
samples with 1%).  

The abnormal blood sugar status can disrupt homeostasis, providing a more profound change 
on the microbiota profile particularly when combined with periodontitis (19). In a recent study, 
Matsha et al. detected nine phyla in plaque samples of individuals with DM and periodontitis, namely 
Firmicutes, Proteobacteria, Bacteroidetes, Fusobacteria, and Actinobacteria (13). Their findings 
agree with ours, except for Proteobacteria that is enriched in DM in the present study. Our results 
identified a positive correlation of blood glucose level with Absconditabacteriales [SR1, recently 
found in interproximal supragingival biofilms (28) and the anaerobic Caldicoprobacter. On the other 
hand, Leptotrichia, Parviromonas, and Balneolaceae significantly decreased with the increased blood 
glucose. The periodontal clinical parameters evaluated in the present study enable to find a positive 
correlation of clinical attachment level with Balneolaceae and Fastidiosipila, the last one detected in 
all samples. It is essential to point out that the most frequent genera strongly associated with 
periodontitis, such as Tannerella, Treponema, and Porphyromonas demonstrated a connection with 
increased pH and the number of remaining teeth (Figure 3). Abiotrophia was negative, while 
Johnsonella was positively correlated to the number of remaining teeth (Figure 2). Due to the lack of 
power to confirm those correlations, more studies are necessary focusing on the salivary minority 
microbiota. We project that it is necessary to recruit a minimum sample size of 14 to detect a 
correlation of 0.7, power of 80%, and alpha of 5% (Fisher’s Z test). 

What stands out in the patients’ clinical parameters is the slightly lower salivary pH in the 
presence of DM. The superior amount of glucose in the saliva and the crevicular gingival fluid 
increases the acidogenicity of bacteria (21). It can be accountable for reducing the pH, which can 
contribute to the proliferation of fermenting organisms and metabolizing acids. Yang et al., for 
example, observed an enrichment of Lactobacillus fermentum in the saliva of patients with DM that 
decreased after DM treatment (18). Furthermore, important pH regulating mechanisms are lactate 
metabolism that facilitates the pH neutralization, producing propionate, acetate, CO2 and H2; the 
nitrogen utilization by some species; and the release of basic substances to lower pH (29). Those 
characteristics reflected the enrichment of some bacteria in the DM group, such as Veillonella and 
Prevotella, both observed in the CCA triplot following the decreased pH and increased FBG. 
Veillonella is considered an “acid sink” organism linked to the classical Socransky’s purple-complex 
together with A. odontolyticus (30). The differences in the abundance of Veillonella in saliva 
compared to the subgingival plaque can be expected, as in periodontal pockets the O2 is reduced 
favouring this species growing. Nevertheless, its enrichment in the presence of DM can reflect the 
increased salivary glucose levels and should be better investigated. Strikingly, a previous study has 
confirmed the gene activity of Veillonella at low pH, identifying metabolic activities that are possibly 
responsible for a pH of recovery linked to Veillonella, recognizing this species as a pH-neutralizing 
organism (31). Furthermore, these health-related organisms in periodontal sites (32) supplies through 
its metabolism the menadione (vitamin K)  indispensable for the development of Porphyromonas 
gingivalis and Prevotella intermedia (33).   

The abundance of bacterial genera found in the saliva could be impacted by the abundance 
and composition of bacteria attached to the dental surfaces since all patients included in the presented 
study were diagnosed with periodontitis regardless of their systemic condition. These results reinforce 
that the saliva reflects the microbiota of the subgingival environment, although differences in 
abundance are expected, and it is a simple and representative means for analysing the microbiome of 
individuals with periodontitis. We believe that saliva should be the sample choice to analyse complex 
oral conditions, particularly when affected by a systemic condition. Besides, the gut microbiota of 
individuals with DM showed a higher proliferation of some phyla such as Proteobacteria, 
Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes in comparison with healthy individuals. In this pilot study, 
Bacterioidetes and Proteobacacteria were also enriched in the salivary microbiome of DMP, 
somehow reflecting the pattern the gut microbiome (34), and this can suggest a correlation of the gut 
and oral microbiome that should be investigated.  

Here, all participants presented high degrees of periodontitis. The clinical inflammatory 
parameter BOP increasing was related to the enrichment of Actinobacteria and a lower BOP to 
Spirochaetes. Sun et al. also demonstrated that periodontal parameters were positively correlated with 
several well-known periodontitis microbiotas, including P. gingivalis, T. forsythia, P. capri, 
Alloprevotella rava, P. denticola, Catenibacterium mitsuokai, Prevotella stercorea and Treponema 
medium (19). Furthermore, Porphyromonas gingivalis described as a keystone in periodontitis, was 
highly prevalent in the salivary microbiome across all samples. That corroborates with the theory that 
P. gingivalis can orchestrate the inflammophilic microbiota promoting the imbalance of the oral 
environment. Following the concepts of the ‘polymicrobial synergy and dysbiosis’ (PSD) model (35), 
what means that those microorganisms do not always lead to converting a symbiotic microbiota to a 
dysbiotic one but are benefiting from it and help maintain it.  

Based on the implicating evidence from a small sample size, caution must be applied. Besides, 
further studies are needed to confirm the impact of controlled/uncontrolled DM. Lastly, it is always 
important to emphasize the choice of primer in the conception of sample diversity, although the V4 
hypervariable region is traditionally selected due to the lower error rate and adequate information for 
taxonomic classification of microbial communities. 

In conclusion, these preliminary results possibly suggest that clinical parameters can be 
reflected in the minority salivary microbiome of patients with T2D and periodontitis. Results 
suggested putative signatures of the number of the low-abundance microbiota correlated with the 
number of remaining teeth, FBG, and salivary pH. It is indispensable to perform more studies with 
larger sample sizes to understand these patterns of oral manifestations of DM for effective prevention 
and treatment strategies. This pilot study can be helpful for further research planning on salivary 
microbiome considering the low abundant species, as well as supporting research for further 
manipulate oral microbiota in clinic for medical benefit. Once confirmed, low abundant 
microorganisms correlated to clinical parameters can be a potential strategic therapeutic target. 

Dr. Adriana Giongo, Prof. Cynthia Kyaw and Dr. Aline Belmok are acknowledged for their support. 
Luiz Gustavo dos A. Borges thanks PEGA/PUCRS. We thank the High-Performance Computing Lab 
(LAD/PUCRS) fellows for allowing access to run the high-throughput computational analyses. The 
authors are grateful to the Scientific Initiation Program from the Brazilian National Council for 
Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq). 
