Respiratory symptoms, especially the development of severe 
acute respiratory distress syndrome, dominate the discussion 
and initial concerns of the population and health professionals. 
However, the cardiovascular system is greatly affected by these 
conditions and is often responsible for complications and 
mortality of these patients. In order to show the cardiovascular 
implications in patients infected with COVID-19 and the 
importance of social isolation as an alternative to curb the 
spread of the disease, a literature review was carried out 
based on 37 articles, in English, Portuguese and Spanish, 
available on Scielo and PubMed. The findings showed that 
cardiac complications associated with COVID-19 infection 
are similar to those produced by: severe acute respiratory 
syndrome (SARS), Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) 
and influenza. However, COVID-19 has a much greater and 
faster contamination and, unlike influenza, there is no vaccine 
or treatment available yet. In view of this, social isolation 
becomes a tool that can reduce and flatten the curve of cases 
and thus protect the people at higher risk, decreasing the 
chances of serious conditions related to the disease, potential 
deaths and the collapse of the country’s health system.

Coronavirus is a virus belonging to the Coronaviridae 
family, causing simple flu to diseases that can cause greater 
risks to the population’s health. The novel coronavirus, which 
caused the 2020 pandemic, received the name SARS-CoV-2 
by the World Health Organization (WHO), and the disease 
it causes has the name: COVID-19.1 It was first detected in 
December 2019 in Wuhan, China. However, due to its high 
dissemination power, several countries confirmed the presence 
of allochthonous cases in mid-January 2020. In Brazil, the first 
case was confirmed on February 26, 2020.2,3
Until the appearance of SARS-CoV-2, two other epidemics 
caused by coronavirus were described: SARS-CoV-1, which 
causes severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), in 2002; 
and MERS-CoV, which caused the Middle East respiratory 
syndrome (MERS), in 2012.4 The pathophysiology of SARS-
CoV-2 was similar to that of SARS-CoV-1, as they present acute 
lung injuries due to the aggressive inflammation initiated by 
viral replication. SARS-CoV-2 infection can cause increased 
secretion of pro-inflammatory interleukins and interferon-
gamma (IFN-γ) that cause lung damage.5

Brazil, like other countries, is going through the process of 
demographic transition that has the aging of the population as 
its main effect. Thus, diseases of the circulatory system appear 
as the main cause of mortality in the population. By associating 
this information with recent studies of cardiovascular 
implications and their worsening by SARS-CoV-2, it is evident 
that prevention and control measures that reduce risks 
of contamination and infection are important tools in the 
reduction of severe cases of the disease and potential deaths.

This article relates the current pandemic of COVID-19 with 
the cardiovascular implications, showing the importance of 
social isolation as a measure to prevent and control the spread 
of the disease and preserve the country’s Health System.

Literature review based on 37 articles, in English, 
Portuguese and Spanish, available on Scielo and PubMed, 
referring to the cardiovascular implications in patients infected 
with Covid-19, the importance of social isolation as a measure 
of prevention and control of disease spread and preservation 
of the country’s health system.

The COVID-19 pandemic, as well as previous epidemics of 
other coronaviruses (SARS and MERS) and the 2009 pandemic 
(H1N1), have serious consequences for the health, economic 
and social models of the entire world population.

Although demographic transition occurs differently from 
country to country, in general, is characterized by an increase 
in the elderly population compared to other age groups, as 
it grows about 4% per year. Factors such as reduced fertility, 
reduced infant mortality and general mortality, improvements 
in health care for the population, technological development 
with regard to the diagnosis and treatment of diseases also 
corroborate the current demographic scenario.6

Concomitantly with the increase in the number of elderly 
people, there is an epidemiological transition, with an increase 
in the proportion of circulatory diseases, diabetes mellitus, 
neoplasms, diseases due to external causes and diseases of 
the respiratory system.7 Studies show that a higher frequency 
of comorbidities is commonly related to older age. 

The mortality rate of COVID-19 can be nine times higher 
among people with some chronic disease compared to that of 
patients without any pre-existing pathology. Data provided by 
the World Health Organization (WHO) in February show that 
in the group of infected people without comorbidities, only 
1.4% died. Among patients with some cardiovascular disease, 
for example, the rate reached 13.2%. Considering all infected 
patients, lethality was 3.8%, but it is worth mentioning that, 
due to the progress of the pandemic, new statistical data has 
been added to the studies.

The severe form of the disease was observed in older 
patients8,9 who had a more significant number of comorbid 
conditions compared to non-severe patients. These findings 
suggest that age and associated comorbidities may be one of 
the risk factors for critically ill patients. Besides, the elderly and 
immunosuppressed patients may manifest atypical symptoms 
and other forms of presentation, including mild, moderate and 
severe pneumonia and, in more severe cases, severe acute 
respiratory syndrome, sepsis, septic shock and death.4

In a case report of 138 patients hospitalized with COVID-19, 
16.7% of patients developed arrhythmia and 7.2% suffered 
acute cardiac injury, in addition to other complications related 
to COVID-19. Published reports indicate cases of acute onset 
heart failure, myocardial infarction, myocarditis and cardiac 
arrest.10 Moreover, cases of myocardial damage, with increased 
troponin I, acute cardiac damage, shock and arrhythmia, 
were found.11,12

In the acute phase of severe viral conditions, not only 
in COVID-19, but also in other Coronavirus illnesses, the 
patient may present tachycardia, hypotension, bradycardia, 
arrhythmias and sudden death. Abnormal findings on 
electrocardiograms and increased troponin signal myocardial 
involvement in the form of myocarditis.11,12

Cohort studies published to date show rates of acute 
heart failure, shock and arrhythmia of 7.2%, 8.7% and 
16.7%, respectively. Cardiovascular involvement is due to 
a mismatch between the increased metabolic/inflammatory 
demand triggered by the virus and reduced cardiac reserve. 
The inflammatory state makes the environment more prone 
to thrombotic phenomena. Therefore, the recommendation 
has been that patients’ chronic medications should be 
maintained, with their withdrawal/replacement being assessed 
on an individual level and in accordance with the guidelines 
in force so far. It is worth noting that new recommendations 
may emerge as new studies in progress come out.13,14

Chronic diseases, such as hypertension, diabetes, diseases 
of the respiratory system, cardiovascular diseases and their 
conditions of susceptibility, share some standardized states 
with infectious diseases, such as pro-inflammatory state and 
the attenuation of innate immune response. Diabetes, for 
example, occurs partly because the accumulation of innate 
immune cells activated in metabolic tissues leads to the 
release of inflammatory mediators, especially IL-1β and TNFα, 
which promote insulin resistance and damage to β cells.15 
Moreover, metabolic disorders can lead to depression of the 
immune function, impairing the function of macrophages and 
lymphocytes,16 which can make individuals more susceptible 
to complications and aggravations of COVID-19.9

Many of the older patients who become seriously ill have 
evidence of underlying diseases, such as cardiovascular 
diseases, liver diseases, kidney diseases or malignant 
tumors.17-19 These patients usually die from their original 
comorbidities. Therefore, the accurate assessment of all 
original comorbidities of individuals with COVID-19 must be 
rigorously analyzed and considered from an individualized 
therapeutic perspective. 

Other studies add that the respiratory failure aggravated 
by SARS-CoV-2 occurs due to massive alveolar damage. This 
virus is capable of infecting human respiratory epithelial cells 
through an interaction between the viral S protein and the 
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 receptor in human cells. 
Although there is evidence in the literature that the presence 
of severe lung infections can affect the long-term prognosis of 
individuals with heart diseases, there is no data to confirm that 
patients recovered from COVID-19 infection will experience 
long-term effects.20,21

Thus, not only capable of causing pneumonia, COVID-19 
can also cause damage to other organs, and patients end up 
dying from multiple organ failure, shock, acute respiratory 
distress syndrome, heart failure, arrhythmias and kidney 
failure.22 Potential injuries to multiple organs and their protection 
and prevention should be monitored in the treatment of 
COVID-19.23 In these critical patients, the necessary protective 
measures include mechanical ventilation, glucocorticoids, 
antivirals, symptomatic treatments and shock therapy.

Another important factor would be the approach to 
estimating the transmissibility of a virus by calculating its 
reproductive number (R0), which represents a measure of 
its attack rate, that is, it translates the number of secondary 
infections that occur from an infected individual in a 
susceptible population. Preliminary studies pointed out that 
this new coronavirus, responsible for COVID-19, would be 
associated with R0 rates of 1.5 to 3.5, with the most recent 
data suggesting an R0 of 4.08 (i.e., for each case, on average 
, there would be four new infected individuals).7

As it has a high potential for dissemination1 and, knowing 
that it is an RNA virus, enveloped and contaminated by 
respiratory droplets or contact, hygiene measures must be 
improved and put into practice. These are: washing our hands 
with soap and water to destroy the morphological structure of 
the virus, using 70% alcohol-based hand sanitizer, covering our 
mouth when coughing or sneezing to prevent viral particles 
from spreading through the environment, avoiding crowds 
and staying in a well-ventilated area.3,4

According to the literature, the average incubation period 
for coronavirus is 5 days, with intervals that can be as long 
as 12 days. Preliminary data for SARS-CoV-2 suggest that 
transmission may occur even without the appearance of signs 
and symptoms.4,5

When there are no complications, the symptoms 
consist of fever, dry cough and tiredness. Runny nose and 
nasal congestion, sore throat and diarrhea may also occur. 
Furthermore, most of those infected are asymptomatic (about 
80%) and recover without requiring any special treatment, 
while 1/6 of the patients can progress severely, with breathing 
issues.24,25

In view of the current situation, it is extremely important 
for the population to act conscientiously and stay at home, 
whether symptomatic or not, with the aim of reducing the 
number of infected people and delaying the disseminated 
community transmission, so that the public health system 
may be able to serve everyone.26 Otherwise, the exponential 
growth of the disease may break the health system, leading to 
the death of the most fragile ones. Those who need to hang 
around in public places, due to work or force majeure, should 
take preventive measures.27

Slowing down the spread of the virus so that the number 
of cases spreads over time instead of having peaks in the 
beginning is one of the ways to flatten the epidemic curve 
and prevent the public health system from collapsing and, 
as a consequence, many people end up dying (Figure 1). 
Controlled disease transmission reduces pressure on the health 
system and increases the capacity of taking care not only of 
patients infected with coronavirus, but also those requiring 
medical care due to other illnesses. 

Staying at home is intended to provide a means of precaution 
to reduce the risk of transmitting respiratory infections, such 
as that caused by the coronavirus (COVID-19). These special 
precautions prevent the contact of respiratory secretions of a 
person who may be infected with the coronavirus from coming 
into contact with others.19 People who have tested positive for 
the said virus or are under suspicion should remain at home. 

Ideally, the individual should be alone in a bedroom or in a 
room that may temporarily serve as a bedroom, with a private 
bathroom if possible.28,29 The bedroom doors should be closed 
all the time, but the windows should be open so that the area 
may stay well ventilated. The patient should only leave this 
isolated room if necessary.30-32 

Therefore, social isolation and preventive measures are 
necessary to prevent, mainly, that the elderly get infected 
and worsen preexisting diseases, complicating their health 
situation and leading to signs and symptoms that can often 
be fatal.33,34 When a disease spreads quickly, services are 
overcrowded, there are not enough beds, masks, doctors, 
ventilators and other equipment for those in need, and this is 
not only for COVID-19, but for any other illness that requires 
the patients to seek health care. The system must be prevented 
from collapsing.35

There is consensus among the authors that the group at 
higher risk for developing the most severe form, which may 
lead to death, includes the elderly and individuals who have 
the most prevalent comorbidities, including cardiovascular 
diseases.36

The crucial thing is not the severity of the disease itself, but 
the ability to care for all those infected when they need it. The 
more the transmission curve is flattened over time, the less the 
burden on the health system and the greater the likelihood 
that it will meet the epidemic demand — which highlights 
the importance of social isolation as a measure for preventing 
and controlling the spread of the disease and preserving the 
country’s health system.
