Publication status: Not informed by the submitting author
Ethical Responsibility in Environmentally Sustainable Health
Care
José Chen-Xu
https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4691
Submitted on: 2022-09-01
Posted on: 2022-09-01 (version 1)
(YYYY-MM-DD)
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
1 
Ethical Responsibility in Environmentally Sustainable Health Care 
José Chen-Xu1,2 
1 National School of Public Health - NOVA University of Lisbon, Portugal 
2 Public Health Unit - Primary Health Care Cluster Baixo Mondego, Coimbra, Portugal 
Address: Avenida Padre Cruz, 1600-560 Lisboa 
Mobile: (+351) 91 786 2758 
Email: josechenx@gmail.com  
ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1238-1384  
 
Abstract 
Environmental issues gained momentum in recent years, with consequences of climate 
change already being felt across the world. As the environment worsens health, human 
activities also influence the environment, by worsening this process, creating an 
uninterrupted cycle which might speed up climate change. The health sector plays a role 
as important as the other sectors, as one of the human activities with high impact on 
the environment, owing to the high consumption of resources, water and energy, and 
the production of millions of tons of waste daily across the world, overall contributing 
to high levels of greenhouse gases. This is especially important as health care institutions 
need to operate 24/7 to satisfy medical needs of the populations. However, few green 
measures have been implemented in this field, as it is perceived as costly and ineffective. 
Ethical concerns arise from this scenario, as corporate social responsibility and 
accountability weight in the decision of investing in green infrastructures. Efficiency and 
optimal financial management play a role on minimizing costs of existing activities, while 
trying to provide the best care to patients. This paper explores the rationale for 
implementing green measures, reviewing the current status on environmental 
sustainability within the health care sector, as it discusses different perspectives on 
ethical issues emerging when managing health institutions and how these can be 
instrumental to drive policy-based change. 
 
Keywords: ethics; environment; sustainability; responsibility; health 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4691
 
2 
 
Introduction 
Since the beginning of the century, environmental issues have gained more prominence, 
with a focus on the impact we have on the environment and how it can affect the 
present and future generations. The United Nations has created in 2015 the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs), aiming to achieve seventeen different goals by 2030, 
introducing several objectives related to the environment and sustainable cities and 
communities (SDG11) and climate action (SDG13). (United Nations General Assembly, 
2015)  
Climate change refers to long-term shifts in conditions and patterns that cause extreme 
weather events.  These may lead to change in health threats in human beings, which in 
turn multiplies pre-existing health conditions. (Wu et al., 2016) Effects of climate change 
are thus a cause of major public health issues. On the other hand, health institutions 
also play a part in feeding the cycle, by aggravating environmental issues with its 
activities, which account for around 8% of all greenhouse gases emitted in the United 
States. (Eckelman and Sherman, 2016) 
Ethical concerns related to the health sector’s role in the environment has emerged in 
recent years, (Paraizo and Begin, 2020) with studies showing a great environmental 
footprint of global healthcare. (Lenzen et al., 2020) Discussions on the benefits of putting 
in place green measures have emerged in the past years, bringing more accountability 
to institutions, strengthening leadership, educating communities, and saving money. 
(Institute of Medicine of the National Academies, 2007)  
Some policy-based solutions have been put forward to regulate energy consumption in 
buildings. (UN Environment and International Energy Agency, 2017) This has only been 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4691
 
3 
possible with the existence, in the various sectors, of pondered decisions on the ethical 
implications of health care activities. The application of sustainable practices in this 
specific sector, of environmental measures within health institutions, as well as green 
financing and investment which tackles more upstream, are the solutions needed to 
break this vicious cycle. 
 
The issue: impact of health institutions in the environment  
Health institutions are open systems, where material exchanges occur between them 
and the environment. Just as the environment has a negative influence on health, 
(Institute of Medicine of the National Academies, 2007) health organizations will also 
have an impact on the environment, which in turn increases negative health 
consequences. (Skolnik, 2020) 
According to the United Nations, in its report on buildings and the construction sector, 
it reports that they represent around 35% of the global energy consumed, leading to 
almost 40% of energy-related CO2 emissions, playing an important role in sustainable 
transformation. (UN Environment and International Energy Agency, 2017, Khasreen et 
al., 2009)  
The health sector also accounts for a big part of this consumption, coming in third just 
after the food sales and services sectors, consuming around twice as much as the 
average of all accounted sectors, stated a report in 1995 (Figure 1). (Institute of 
Medicine of the National Academies, 2007)  
The consumption has ever since increased, with hospitals in the United States 
consuming an average of 738.5 kWh/m2, 2.6 times higher than other commercial 
buildings, (Bawaneh et al., 2019) which accounts for 8% of all greenhouse gases 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4691
 
4 
emissions in the country (Figure 2). (Chung and Meltzer, 2009) In the United Kingdom, 
the National Health Service consumed energy that accounted for 21.3 million metric 
tons of CO2 equivalents in 2007, which sums up to around 3% of all greenhouse gases 
emissions in England. (Brown et al., 2012) Regarding hospitals in Brazil, their energy 
consumption reaches 10.6% of the total energy utilized for commercial purposes. 
(Dhillon and Kaur, 2015) 
Common energy waste practices in these sectors include the usage of air conditioning 
in completely unoccupied spaces, failure to maintain or repair equipment and neglect 
to check for air or water leaks, increasing inefficiency and costs for institutions. (Kaplan 
et al., 2012) In addition, buildings consume a large amount of water throughout their 
life cycle, in addition to the energy needed for supply and use, which has increased in 
recent decades, (Rothausen and Conway) leading to an increase in emissions and 
consequently, a greater negative environmental impact. (Mannan and Al-Ghamdi, 2020) 
In the health care sector, the main obvious impact of its activities is related to 
downstream products, namely the waste produced. (Institute of Medicine of the 
National Academies, 2007) Particularly at the hospital level, a study reports the 
experience of the United States, whose use of resources leads to the production of 
about 7000 tons of hospital waste daily and an annual cost of around 10 billion dollars 
in their management. (Senay and Landrigan, 2018) In addition, it is also reported that in 
this country, 85% of the waste produced in a general hospital is not hazardous (groups I 
and II), often placed in the biological waste container, increasing waste management 
costs and the environmental impact through inadequate waste treatment. (Kaplan et 
al., 2012)  
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4691
 
5 
A study conducted in 2013 in the United States evaluated the impact of health care 
activities in the environment. Hospitals were the largest contributor to environmental 
and health impacts, with 31–37% of the total, while prescription drug expenditures were 
the largest contributor to ozone depletion (33%), medical devices contributing with 22% 
and hospital care being responsible for 15% of the impact. This study also revealed that 
power generation and supply of health care facilities and their supply chain were the 
primary processes contributing to acidification, whereas surgical and medical 
instrument manufacturing and pharmaceutical preparation manufacturing contributed 
more for ozone depletion. Waste management was the most preponderant contributor 
to ecotoxicity and human health toxicity. (Eckelman and Sherman, 2016) 
Another study evaluated the global environmental footprint of health care in 2015 
(Figure 3), with categorization by direct (lightest shade), first-order (middle shade), and 
supply-chain (darkest shade) impacts caused by health care directly, by health care's 
immediate suppliers, and the remainder, respectively. The impact of health care is 
shown as a percentage of total impact, for the world (segments) and selected countries 
(spokes). Regarding greenhouse gas emissions, health care contributes with around 
4.4%, while it is responsible for 2.8% of particulate matter emissions, 3.4% of NOx 
emissions and 3.6% of SO2 emissions. (Lenzen et al., 2020) 
 
Organizational ethics in building sustainable health institutions 
Ethical issues often arise in clinical settings, being one of the subjects studied in medical 
schools across the world. (Shamim et al., 2020) However, another field within this 
context and which is often forgotten is organizational ethics, a field of the applied ethics 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4691
 
6 
which focus on the health environment, resource allocation and decision-making 
processes associated with the organization. (Paraizo and Begin, 2020)  
Problems that emerge in organizational ethics are varied, and professionals tend to 
focus on costs management and saving, efficiency, quality of care and the effects of their 
decisions on patient care. (Castlen et al., 2017)  
Sustainability issues of buildings have also been addressed in the literature within this 
topic. Many of the issues discussed by the end of the 20th century are related to the 
durability of buildings – many of the health facilities built in the 1950s and sometimes 
even recent ones are now obsolete, being dysfunctional and costly to construct and 
maintain. Such decisions are only short-term and lead to increasing costs and problems 
that are preventable. (Institute of Medicine of the National Academies, 2007) As such, 
there is a need to design health facilities in a pragmatic, ethical, and holistic manner, 
which might influence the health environment and even workers’ productivity. (World 
Green Building Council, 2014) 
More recent research reported issues related to organizational vulnerabilities, with 
associated conditions that weaken the organization, as public money management, and 
respective risk analysis in health care management, in order to assess and prevent 
ethical risks, including the ones linked to quality of care and financial allocation of 
resources. (Paraizo and Begin, 2020, Sepetis, 2020) These issues contribute to the 
sustainability of health care institutions and should also be taken into consideration in 
decision-making processes. 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4691
 
7 
Ethics and social responsibility in health 
The Universal Declaration of Bioethics and Human Rights refers in its Article 14 - "social 
responsibility and health" as a principle of bioethics. (Unesco, 2005) This holistic 
approach broadens the scope of bioethics into other areas, such as social problems, 
determinants of health and health policies, (Vivanco, 2018) adding aspects of justice and 
fairness to these problems. (Jennings et al., 2016) As a result, health care is seen as a 
responsibility of governments towards the people they serve, which focus in four main 
areas: medical care; research; industry; and education. (UNESCO, 2018)  
Some of the concrete actions enunciated in the UNESCO report on social responsibility 
and health are related to the criteria in decision-making in health policies and the 
mitigating actions of environmental deterioration and pandemic management. 
(UNESCO, 2018, Vivanco, 2018) Failure to provide mitigation and adaptation actions for 
issues as climate change would be to disrespect the principle of social responsibility. 
(UNESCO, 2018) 
Despite referring to environment issues and natural disasters as part of the social 
responsibilities within bioethics, UNESCO fails to address the issue upstream – the need 
to tackle the issues where they emerge, by building green, and by implementing green 
measures before issues appear. These changes might be enacted by creating public 
policies, (Watts et al., 2015) changing regulations and procedures related to health care 
institutions’ management (Kallio et al., 2018) and providing green financing 
opportunities (OECD, 2016).   
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4691
 
8 
Environmental Health Ethics 
Ethical issues related to environment have been discussed by other ethicists, but 
oftentimes in a separate way from health issues. This is due to the focus of 
environmental ethics on the environment itself and the value of non-human nature, 
which can lead to a separation of these issues from human health ethics. (Jennings et 
al., 2016) One way to connect this concept to human ethics is its instrumental value, as 
a means to influence positively the health of populations, through climate, food source 
and green spaces aesthetics, which perceives the environment as an ecosystem service 
provider. (Jax et al., 2013) This perspective removes the nature’s intrinsic value and 
positions nature according to human needs, being a framework that is severely 
criticized. (Jennings et al., 2016) Conversely, environmental ethics brings forward the 
potential harmful effects of human health care in the deterioration of the environment, 
which has been recognized by hospitals, becoming a driver for change to more 
sustainable health care management practices. (Jameton and Pierce, 2001)  
On the other hand, frameworks on environmental health ethics have emerged, (Gribble, 
2017) as environmental health is an integral part of public health. Within this field, 
climate change and its effects on human health are studied, as well as political and 
economic dynamics related to funding research on climate change, but little mention is 
made regarding the role of health care institutions in fighting global warming. Instead, 
a more general mention of industries with direct impact on the environment, as the ones 
related with fossil fuels, are the main focus when discussing environmental health 
ethics. (Resnik, 2012) These frameworks do, however, account for principles as utility, 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4691
 
9 
justice, stewardship, sustainability, and precaution, (Gribble, 2017) which will inherently 
include the role of health institutions in the fight against climate change.  
 
Ethical responsibility of health institutions regarding the environment 
Ethical issues arise in the decision-making processes, as the environmental impact of 
health care and the need for sustainability in health institutions raise ethical questions 
regarding the environmental stewardship. (Jameton and Pierce, 2001) Not only 
bioethics and social responsibility are involved, but also organizational and 
environmental health ethics.  
The main environmental responsibility in hospital care is to avoid unnecessary 
emissions, and this is guided by the management body and by ethical values. These 
values consist on social responsibility, good care, and professionalism, (Kallio et al., 
2018) which together act as a driver for changing and improving environmental practices 
in health care institutions. 
Accordingly, organizational commitment of the management and staff is key for 
implementation of environmental measures. (Pisters et al., 2017, Kallio et al., 2018) 
However, this is not sufficient. Health care organizations need to go further in the 
commitment and support these measures, by providing education and training, clear 
procedures, defined roles, and a motivational culture and health facilities that are 
prepared for the implementation of green measures. (Kallio et al., 2018)  
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4691
 
10 
Environmental measures in health institutions  
The United Nations report published in 2017 lists a set of objectives for achieving the 
environmental sustainability of buildings, which includes planning policies, adaptation 
of buildings and energy management, among others.  
Several measures are suggested, such as the use of technology to improve efficiency, 
using solar energy for heating and cooling, and as a water transport pump, in addition 
to the application of efficient lighting measures, such as the utilization of light-emitting 
diode (LED) bulbs. (UN Environment and International Energy Agency, 2017, Dhillon and 
Kaur, 2015) Countries such as Canada, China and Rwanda already have regulations that 
establish minimum requirements for energy efficiency and resource management in 
buildings, although about two thirds of the countries worldwide do not have such 
regulations. (UN Environment and International Energy Agency, 2017)  
For these measures to be applied, there must be investment in energy efficiency, which 
still represents a small portion of the investment made at the management level. 
Despite this, the European Union has proposed several projects and funding in recent 
years, in order to achieve the goal of carbon neutrality. (European Commission, 2020) 
Regarding health institutions, efforts have been made to invest in them, with a strong 
focus on hospitals, with the aim of transforming them into green hospitals. Green 
buildings seek to minimize the impact on the environment by reducing energy and water 
consumption and limiting environmental damage at the construction site. (Allen et al., 
2015)  
Other measures have been mentioned in previous studies. (Buffoli et al., 2014, McGain 
and Naylor, 2014) A study exemplifies the cost-effectiveness of implementing these 
measures, through the application of energy saving measures and the reprocessing of 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4691
 
11 
single-use materials, with a cost reduction in the order of ten billion dollars over ten 
years. (Kaplan et al., 2012) Another study compares initiatives and measures that 
contribute to the institution’s resilience in the face of climate change, demonstrating 
their long-term cost-effectiveness. (Balbus et al., 2016) Pisters et al. reinforce the 
importance and need for organizational commitment, combined with the reduction of 
energy consumption, as key elements for the success of the institution. (Pisters et al., 
2017) 
A major measure applied in recent years is digitalization. Even though this process also 
requires use of energy, it still allows for energy saving, with smart controls and 
connected devices saving around 230 EJ until 2040, and around 140 EJ in non-residential 
facilities (Figure 4). (UN Environment and International Energy Agency, 2017) 
All these measures contribute for building more sustainable health care institutions, 
which allow for decreasing resources consumption, increasing efficiency in their 
processes, and overall decreasing the emission of greenhouse gases, thus decreasing 
their impact in the environment. 
 
Instruments enabling implementation of Green Measures 
The Green Guide for Health Care is a toolkit that advises on the steps needed to enable 
implementation of environmental measures, created by Health Care Without Harm, and 
joins several methods based on Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) 
and Triple Bottom Line (TBL), and it has been used in the construction and renovation of 
several health care facilities. (Institute of Medicine of the National Academies, 2007) 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4691
 
12 
The Pan-American Health Organization has created a Green Checklist and Discussion 
Guide, (PAHO, 2013) based on LEED rating system. This type of tools help institutions 
analyse and prepare the implementation of green measures. 
Another valuable instrument is the Green Hospital Procurement Policy and Procedure 
Manual, and Implementation Guide, (Canadian Coalition For Green Health Care, 2016) 
created by the Canadian Coalition for Green Health Care, as well as the Green Purchasing 
in Health Care guide developed by Health Care Without Harm, (Health Care Without 
Harm, 2006) assisting institutions in putting in place environmentally-friendly 
purchasing practices, taking into account life cycle perspective, resource efficiency and 
pollution prevention.   
 
Conclusion 
The health care sector has an ethical responsibility to evaluate its impact through 
meaningful research and implement sustainable measures that cause less harm to the 
environment, decreasing its long-term impact and ensuring more sustainability in their 
practices.  
There is still a long way to go as the COVID-19 pandemic has had a profound impact in 
waste production, with increasing single use materials and worsening waste 
management processes. As such, the post-pandemic world must focus on building back 
better, by investing in green measures and ensuring resilience of health care systems.  
However, green financing is not the sole duty of health care institutions, since ethical 
concerns and corporate social responsibility are also part of other private business and 
public service sectors. This role is as important, if not even more pressing as health care 
institutions need to operate continuously to provide the needed care to populations. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4691
 
13 
The investment in environmentally friendly solutions is urgent, so that a joint change in 
all sectors can have a stronger and lasting positive impact in the environment and thus 
delaying the consequences of climate change.  
 
Funding Statement: The author received no financial support for the research, authorship, 
and/or publication of this article. 
Conflict of Interests Declaration: The author certifies that he has NO affiliations with or 
involvement in any organization or entity with any financial or non-financial interest in the 
subject matter or materials discussed in this manuscript. 
 
 
References  
 
ALLEN, J. G., MACNAUGHTON, P., LAURENT, J. G., FLANIGAN, S. S., EITLAND, E. S. & 
SPENGLER, J. D. 2015. Green Buildings and Health. Curr Environ Health Rep, 2, 
250-8. 
BALBUS, J., BERRY, P., BRETTLE, M., JAGNARINE-AZAN, S., SOARES, A., UGARTE, C., 
VARANGU, L. & PRATS, E. V. 2016. Enhancing the sustainability and climate 
resiliency of health care facilities: a comparison of initiatives and toolkits. Rev 
Panam Salud Publica, 40, 174-180. 
BAWANEH, K., NEZAMI, F. G., RASHEDUZZAMAN, M. & DEKEN, B. 2019. Energy 
Consumption Analysis and Characterization of Healthcare Facilities in the United 
States. Energies, 12. 
BROWN, L. H., BUETTNER, P. G. & CANYON, D. V. 2012. The energy burden and 
environmental impact of health services. Am J Public Health, 102, e76-82. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4691
 
14 
BUFFOLI, M., GOLA, M., ROSTAGNO, M., CAPOLONGO, S. & NACHIERO, D. 2014. Making 
hospitals healthier: how to improve sustainability in healthcare facilities. Ann Ig, 
26, 418-25. 
CANADIAN COALITION FOR GREEN HEALTH CARE 2016. Green Hospital Procurement 
Policy and Procedure Manual, and Implementation Guide. 
CASTLEN, J. P., COTE, D. J., MOOJEN, W. A., ROBE, P. A., BALAK, N., BRENNUM, J., 
AMMIRATI, M., MATHIESEN, T., BROEKMAN, M. L. D., WORLD FEDERATION OF 
NEUROSURGICAL SOCIETIES ETHICS, C. & EUROPEAN ASSOCIATION OF 
NEUROSURGICAL SOCIETIES ETHICO-LEGAL, C. 2017. The Changing Health Care 
Landscape and Implications of Organizational Ethics on Modern Medical 
Practice. World Neurosurg, 102, 420-424. 
CHUNG, J. W. & MELTZER, D. O. 2009. Estimate of the carbon footprint of the US health 
care sector. JAMA, 302, 1970-2. 
DHILLON, V. S. & KAUR, D. 2015. Green Hospital and Climate Change: Their 
Interrelationship and the Way Forward. J Clin Diagn Res, 9, LE01-5. 
ECKELMAN, M. J. & SHERMAN, J. 2016. Environmental Impacts of the U.S. Health Care 
System and Effects on Public Health. PLoS One, 11, e0157014. 
EUROPEAN COMMISSION 2020. Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament 
and of the Council establishing the framework for achieving climate neutrality 
and amending Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 (European Climate Law). 
(COM/2020/80 final). 
GRIBBLE, M. O. 2017. Environmental Health Virtue Ethics. Am J Bioeth, 17, 33-35. 
HEALTH CARE WITHOUT HARM 2006. Green Purchasing in Health Care. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4691
 
15 
INSTITUTE OF MEDICINE OF THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES 2007. Green Healthcare 
Institutions: Health, Environment, and Economics: Workshop Summary. The 
National Academies Press. Washington (DC). 
JAMETON, A. & PIERCE, J. 2001. Environment and health: 8. Sustainable health care and 
emerging ethical responsibilities. CMAJ, 164, 365-9. 
JAX, K., BARTON, D. N., CHAN, K. M., DE GROOT, R., DOYLE, U., ESER, U., GÖRG, C., 
GÓMEZ-BAGGETHUN, E., GRIEWALD, Y. & HABER, W. 2013. Ecosystem services 
and ethics. Ecol. Econ, 93, 260-268. 
JENNINGS, V., YUN, J. & LARSON, L. 2016. Finding Common Ground: Environmental 
Ethics, Social Justice, and a Sustainable Path for Nature-Based Health Promotion. 
Healthcare (Basel), 4. 
KALLIO, H., PIETILÄ, A., JOHNSON, M. & KANGASNIEMI, M. 2018. Environmental 
responsibility in hospital care: Findings from a qualitative study. Journal of 
Hospital Administration, 7. 
KAPLAN, S., SADLER, B., LITTLE, K., FRANZ, C. & ORRIS, P. 2012. Can sustainable hospitals 
help bend the health care cost curve? Issue Brief (Commonw Fund), 29, 1-14. 
KHASREEN, M. M., BANFILL, P. F. G. & MENZIES, G. F. 2009. Life-Cycle Assessment and 
the Environmental Impact of Buildings: A Review. Sustainability, 1, 674-701. 
LENZEN, M., MALIK, A., LI, M., FRY, J., WEISZ, H., PICHLER, P. P., CHAVES, L. S. M., CAPON, 
A. & PENCHEON, D. 2020. The environmental footprint of health care: a global 
assessment. Lancet Planet Health, 4, e271-e279. 
MANNAN, M. & AL-GHAMDI, S. G. 2020. Environmental impact of water-use in buildings: 
Latest developments from a life-cycle assessment perspective. J Environ 
Manage, 261, 110198. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4691
 
16 
MCGAIN, F. & NAYLOR, C. 2014. Environmental sustainability in hospitals - a systematic 
review and research agenda. J Health Serv Res Policy, 19, 245-52. 
OECD 2016. Green Finance and Investment Green Investment Banks: Scaling up Private 
Investment in Low-carbon, Climate-resilient Infrastructure. Paris: OECD 
Publishing. 
PAHO 2013. The Green Checklist and Discussion Guide. PAHO. 
PARAIZO, C. B. & BEGIN, L. 2020. Organizational Ethics in Health Settings. Cien Saude 
Colet, 25, 251-259. 
PISTERS, P., BIEN, B., DANKNER, S., RUBINSTEIN, E. & SHERIFF, F. 2017. Supporting 
hospital renewal through strategic environmental sustainability programs. 
Healthc Manage Forum, 30, 79-83. 
RESNIK, D. B. 2012. Environmental Health Ethics, Cambridge MA, Oxford University 
Press. 
ROTHAUSEN, S. G. S. A. & CONWAY, D. 2011. Greenhouse-gas emissions from energy 
use in the water sector. Nature Climate Change, 1, 210-219. 
SENAY, E. & LANDRIGAN, P. J. 2018. Assessment of Environmental Sustainability and 
Corporate Social Responsibility Reporting by Large Health Care Organizations. 
JAMA Netw Open, 1, e180975. 
SEPETIS, A. 2020. Sustainable Finance in Sustainable Health Care System. Open Journal 
of Business and Management, 8, 262-281. 
SHAMIM, M. S., BAIG, L., ZUBAIRI, N. & TORDA, A. 2020. Review of ethics teaching in 
undergraduate medical education. J Pak Med Assoc, 70, 1056-1062. 
SKOLNIK, R. L. 2020. Global health 101, Burlington, Massachusetts, Jones & Bartlett 
Learning. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4691
 
17 
UN ENVIRONMENT AND INTERNATIONAL ENERGY AGENCY 2017. Towards a zero-
emission, efficient, and resilient buildings and construction sector. Global Status 
Report 2017. 
UNESCO 2005. Universal Declaration on Bioethics & Human Rights. Bull Med Ethics, 11-
5. 
UNESCO 2018. Responsabilidad social y salud. Informe del Comité Internacional de 
Bioética de la UNESCO, Logroño: UNESCO. 
UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY 2015. Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda 
for Sustainable Development. . (Seventieth session, Agenda items 15 and 116). 
VIVANCO, L. 2018. [Social responsibility and health: A pending task]. Aten Primaria, 50, 
653-654. 
WATTS, N., ADGER, W. N., AGNOLUCCI, P., BLACKSTOCK, J., BYASS, P., CAI, W., CHAYTOR, 
S., COLBOURN, T., COLLINS, M., COOPER, A., COX, P. M., DEPLEDGE, J., 
DRUMMOND, P., EKINS, P., GALAZ, V., GRACE, D., GRAHAM, H., GRUBB, M., 
HAINES, A., HAMILTON, I., HUNTER, A., JIANG, X., LI, M., KELMAN, I., LIANG, L., 
LOTT, M., LOWE, R., LUO, Y., MACE, G., MASLIN, M., NILSSON, M., ORESZCZYN, 
T., PYE, S., QUINN, T., SVENSDOTTER, M., VENEVSKY, S., WARNER, K., XU, B., 
YANG, J., YIN, Y., YU, C., ZHANG, Q., GONG, P., MONTGOMERY, H. & COSTELLO, 
A. 2015. Health and climate change: policy responses to protect public health. 
Lancet, 386, 1861-914. 
WORLD GREEN BUILDING COUNCIL 2014. Health, Wellbeing & Productivity in Offices: 
the next chapter for green building. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4691
 
18 
WU, X., LU, Y., ZHOU, S., CHEN, L. & XU, B. 2016. Impact of climate change on human 
infectious diseases: Empirical evidence and human adaptation. Environ Int, 86, 
14-23. 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4691
This preprint was submitted under the following conditions: 
The authors declare that they are aware that they are solely responsible for the content of the preprint and
that the deposit in SciELO Preprints does not mean any commitment on the part of SciELO, except its
preservation and dissemination.
The authors declare that the necessary Terms of Free and Informed Consent of participants or patients in
the research were obtained and are described in the manuscript, when applicable.
The authors declare that the preparation of the manuscript followed the ethical norms of scientific
communication.
The authors declare that the data, applications, and other content underlying the manuscript are
referenced.
The deposited manuscript is in PDF format.
The authors declare that the research that originated the manuscript followed good ethical practices and
that the necessary approvals from research ethics committees, when applicable, are described in the
manuscript.
The authors declare that once a manuscript is posted on the SciELO Preprints server, it can only be taken
down on request to the SciELO Preprints server Editorial Secretariat, who will post a retraction notice in its
place.
The authors agree that the approved manuscript will be made available under a Creative Commons CC-BY
license.
The submitting author declares that the contributions of all authors and conflict of interest statement are
included explicitly and in specific sections of the manuscript.
The authors declare that the manuscript was not deposited and/or previously made available on another
preprint server or published by a journal.
If the manuscript is being reviewed or being prepared for publishing but not yet published by a journal, the
authors declare that they have received authorization from the journal to make this deposit.
The submitting author declares that all authors of the manuscript agree with the submission to SciELO
Preprints.
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
