The purpose of this study was to evaluate the psychometric properties of the PreAcademic Battery, revised version (B-PREA-R) for Cuban preschool children. The battery was administered to 300 children between four and six years of age in Cienfuegos, Cuba. Item analysis showed that, out of 199 items, 61 items were of high quality, 132 items of good quality and 6 items of regulate quality. Cronbach's alpha showed adequate values, α= .85. Factor analysis revealed three factors. Factor 1, "Executive Skills," comprised of the subtests visual selective attention, matrices, story comprehension, graphomotor skills, and quantity counting. Factor 2, "Memory Skills", which groups the visual working memory subtest. Factor 3, "Linguistic Skills", made up of the vocabulary, verbal working memory and repeating syllables subtests. The selection of quartiles for the three age groups (4, 5 and 6 years) allows us to make a judgment about the development of executive, linguistic and memory skills of preschool children. The B-PREA-R is a quick and easy test to apply in the educational context and presents adequate psychometric properties to evaluate the neurocognitive development in the preschool stage, to discover the child's potentialities and weaknesses and to guide his or her preparation to start basic schooling. 

Cognitive development in early childhood creates the foundation for a favorable schooling trajectory in childhood and adolescence, as well as academic and occupational success in adulthood (Doebel, 2020). In many low- and middle-income Latin American countries, more than half of children demonstrate a delay in cognitive proficiency when they enter basic education (Abufhele et al., 2021; Borrescio & Valenzuela, 2021; Vollman & Richland, 2020). These children are not sufficiently prepared to learn and often face additional difficulties in school. Moreover, in recent decades there has been an increase in learning and behavioral disorders associated with alterations in cognitive development during the first years of life (Albes et al., 2021). To reduce this school entry gap, it is necessary to detect difficulties in cognitive development early on in order to be able to intervene in time and not perpetuate the lack of academic, socioeconomic and social mobility opportunities. However, there are currently few culturally validated instruments in Latin America. This study attempts to fill this research gap in the cultural context of Cuba, where adequate cognitive development in early childhood is a major concern of educators and researchers. 

During the last decades Luria's cultural neuropsychology has gained momentum in the assessment and rehabilitation of preschool children (Solovieva & Quintanar, 2021; Solovieva et al., 2019; Bonilla-Sánchez et al., 2019; Cadavid-Ruiz et al., 2019). Such neuropsychology arises from Vygotsky's sociocultural theory and is based on two principles: (1) child development occurs in a sociocultural context and (2) the systemic structure of mental processes. The first means that the child develops through intersubjective activity during upbringing and teaching in a certain social and cultural context. The second, in turn, means that mental processes cannot be divided into isolated functions (attention, language, memory, etc.), but rather it is an integral system (Solovieva & Quintanar, 2021; Solovieva et al., 2019).   

The sociocultural approach offers an important theoretical framework for assessing and stimulating the development of preschool children in the educational context, which is complemented by cognitive neuropsychology in the child population, which typically studies the relationships between the brain (maturation of brain structures) and the behaviors of developing children. A review of the literature allows us to observe a tendency of researchers to develop and adapt cognitive tests in preschool children with an integrated approach, in which the expertise of cognitive neuropsychology is brought together with the foundations of the sociocultural approach (Piedra et al., 2021). 

From this perspective, some researchers have advanced this integration (Flores et al., 2012; Manga & Ramos, 2006; Matute et al., 2007) and propose three requirements for developing tests in the child population: (1) assess neuropsychological skills as an indicator of the maturation and functioning of certain brain structures in formation, (2) consider the most appropriate procedures for designing the test and its items in a given cultural context (e.g., the go-no go procedure has been widely used to develop attention tests in different cultural contexts), and (3) interpret the results through norms (comparing the subject with a reference group) and/or criteria (comparing the subject with respect to an objective to be achieved).  

According to these requirements, some authors have developed and validated instruments for preschool children in low- and middle-income Latin American countries (Bornstein et al., 2015). In Argentina, the CHEXI (Childhood Executive Functioning Inventory) was developed (Gutiérrez et al., 2021), in Chile the TENI (Test de Evaluación Neuropsicológica Infantil) (Tenorio et al., 2014), and in Mexico the ENI (Evaluación neuropsicológica infantil) (Matute et al., 2007) and the BANFE (Batería de funciones ejecutivas y lóbulos frontal) (Flores et al., 2012). In Cuba, Ramírez et al. (2013) worked with the Luria Inicial neuropsychological battery to assess the development of preschool children, and although it showed adequate values of validity and reliability, it has limitations to be applied in the educational context: the application is long and complex and educators do not have the time to train and assess children in their classrooms. 

Considering this limitation, Ramirez et al. (2018) developed the PreAcademic Battery (B-PREA), which assesses cognitive development in children between 4 and 6 years old and helps determine whether a child is ready to start schooling. The application of the B-PREA does not require much time, between 20 and 25 minutes. The battery has two theoretical antecedents: (1) the contributions of Luria's theory in the preschool stage (Solovieva & Quintanar, 2013; Manga & Ramos, 2006) and (2) the foundations of cognitive neuropsychology on the development of tests for preschool children (Tenorio et al., 2014; Portellano, 2000). However, the B-PREA remains a complex test for preschool educators. 

To overcome these weaknesses, modifications were made to the B-PREA to make the application more attractive, shorter, and easier for educators in the preschool educational context. In particular, the reviewers relied on the methodological requirements of experts in early childhood education in Cuba (Gallo et al., 2018), and the subtests of the B-PREA were reworked according to the needs of the preschool curriculum: to perform the comprehensive assessment of the child according to the dimensions of education and development established in the improvement. Similarly, it relied on resolution 238/2014, regulations for the application of the school evaluation system of the Ministry of Education in Cuba, to incorporate the subtests of the B-PREA to the preschool level evaluative system, either by applying them in the partial evaluative cut (four months after the beginning of the school year) or in the final evaluative cut (at the end of the school year).   

The revised B-PREA (B-PREA-R) for educators is a necessity in the Cuban educational context, and responds to several practical and theoretical reasons: (1) there are few validation studies in Cuba of educational tests for children between three and six years of age, (2) the application of most Cuban tests is complex and long, therefore, they are not suitable for use by educators in the preschool context, (3) the increase of preschool children with developmental limitations in several provinces of Cuba (Ramírez & Bernal, 2020; Íñiguez et al. , 2017),  

Taking into account the modifications made to the B-PREA, and the need to use tests in the educational process, the present research proposes as an objective to examine the validity and reliability of the B-PREA-R (item analysis, internal consistency, factor analysis). 

The study sample included 300 preschoolers between four and six years of age (between 46 and 82 months), 100 children between 46 and 58 months (equivalent to pre-kindergarten), 100 between 60 and 70 months (equivalent to kindergarten) and 100 between 72 and 82 months (equivalent to first grade in Cuba) of both sexes (54% boys and 46% girls), from three educational institutions in the city of Cienfuegos, Cuba. The educational institutions were chosen because they are centers with more than 150 children enrolled and come from different areas of the province.  The groups of children were chosen according to the tombola procedure: first, all groups of children were named (institution, number of children, age) and placed in three boxes, which functioned as tombola’s (Grup 1: children 46 and 58 months old; Grup 2: children 60 and 70 months old; Grup 3: children between 72 and 82 months old); then two groups were chosen by age in a lottery to obtain the sample with 100 or more children. The Ministry of Education of the province approved the study that responds to the project "Stimulation of neurodevelopment in early childhood" of the University of Cienfuegos, Faculty of Education. Inclusion criteria for the participating children: (1) between 46 and 82 months of age, (2) typical development for their chronological age, and (3) medium socioeconomic level (families where the father and mother receive a salary between 2100 and 4000 Cuban pesos. The parents' consent and the children's agreement to participate in the study were ethical documents to carry out the research. The characterization of the sample is shown in Table 1. 

The Ethics Committee of the Faculty of Education of the University of Cienfuegos approved the study in the three selected educational institutions of the Municipality of Cienfuegos as did the Ministry of Education in the province. At the same time, informed consent was obtained from the parents and the settlement of the 300 children.  The data were collected in the final evaluation of the educational process, between June and July 2019 in nine groups of children, where each educator conducted the evaluation of her group (nine female educators). For this, the educators were trained at the beginning of the school year between September and October 2018 through methodological workshops, two weekly sessions of 45 minutes each for one month. The educators obtained good grades in the training, learned how to apply the instrument and how to use it in the educational process to direct the education and development of the child. With these results, the educators evaluated the children at the end of the school year and this was done individually in two sessions lasting between 10 and 15 minutes each. The sessions were generally conducted in the morning and the standardized protocol of the B-PREA-R was used.  

The Pre-Academic Battery for Educators (B-PREA-R) was used. This test has as its antecedent the Pre-Academic Battery developed in Cuba to assess the cognitive development of children in the preschool stage in a Cuban context (Ramírez et al, 2018). The B-PREA-R has nine subtests grouped into 199 items of different cognitive abilities such as attention, language, working memory, numerical cognitive processing, motor skills and thinking. These subtests allow the evaluation of the child's cognitive development in different activities typical of this stage (drawing, listening to stories, role-playing). These activities include the skills and knowledge of each dimension of education and development required by the methodological guidelines for the improvement of early childhood education in Cuba (Gallo, et al., 2018), as shown in Table 2. 

Content validity. An item analysis was performed to obtain and analyze the contents of the B-PREA-R. The item analysis was performed considering the values of the discrimination index (item-total correlation) and the item difficulty index. The discrimination index was classified according to the criteria of Ebel & Frisbie (cited in Backhoff et al., 2000): an item with high quality presents values ≥.39, an item with good quality presents values between .30 and .39, an item with fair quality presents values between .20 and .29, and an item with low quality presents values < .20. The difficulty index was classified according to Crocker and Algina (1986) as low difficulty (.80); medium difficulty (between .79 and .50) and high difficulty (<.50).  

Internal structure validity. An exploratory factor analysis was performed to identify the number and composition of components necessary to summarize the observed scores of the B-PREA-R. To determine this analysis, the theoretical assumptions suggested by Lloret-Segura et al. (2014) were taken into account: normality of the data, Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin test (KMO), and the advantages offered by the different extraction and rotation methods.  

Reliability by Internal Consistency. It was determined through Cronbach's alpha and through item analysis (alpha if the item is removed). 

Cut-off point. Percentile values (obtaining quartiles) were obtained through the SPPS. 20.0 on the nine subtests of the B-PREA-R to identify children with low and high abilities according to their age.  

The item-total correlation analysis showed adequate values. Out of 199 items, 61 items showed high quality (30%), 132 items with good quality (66%), 6 items with fair quality (4%) (Table 3). The difficulty index expressed a balance between items that were difficult for children to perform and easier items. Of 199 items, 98 items were considered neither easy nor difficult (49%), 54 items easy to perform (28%), and 47 items difficult to perform for the children (23%) (Table 3). 

The multivariate normality distribution was analyzed, through the estimation of the skewness and kurtosis indices, the fulfillment of the normality assumption is confirmed when the scores of the indices are within the threshold ± 1.5 (Cuadras, 2016) (Table 4). The KMO test indicated that the data can be subjected to factor analysis (KMO = .81). 

The study applied factor analysis using the maximum likelihood method with quartimax rotation, however, the method showed three factors with 47.61% of the common variance, which does not meet the assumption of Cuadras (2016), when it indicates that the adequacy of the factor analysis should explain the common variance greater than or equal to 60%.    

After these results, it was decided to employ the principal component method and with quartimax rotation, which indicated that the nine subtests are grouped into three factors and explain 62.74% of the total variance of the test (See Table 5). Factor 1 "Executive Skills", made up of the sub-tests visual selective attention, matrices, story comprehension, graphomotor skills and counting quantities, explains 34.69% of the variance of B-PREA-R. Factor 2, "Memory Skills" groups the visual working memory sub-test, which explains 15.30% of the variance. Finally, factor 3, "Linguistic Skills", made up of the vocabulary, verbal working memory and repeating syllables subtests, explains 12.74% of the variance. 

The internal consistency of the final instrument indicated an alpha = .85; while the alpha when the item is removed indicated values between .83 and .86.   

Quartiles were identified for the nine subtests in the three age groups as shown in Table 6. 

The present study examined the content validity, internal structure validity, and internal consistency reliability of the B-PREA-R, an instrument that was designed to assess the cognitive development of preschool children in the cultural context of Cuba and to be applied by educators. The content validity of the B-PREA-R improved compared to the previous version (Ramirez, et al., 2018). The B-PREA had 110 items where 28% had low discrimination, while the revised version finally remained with nine subtests, 199 items, 193 items with high and good quality, and six with regular quality. In the previous version, it was recommended to improve the performance of the vocabulary, syllable rhymes, matrices and comparing quantities subtests; however, in the B-PREA-R, the matrices subtest was improved with 15 items of good discrimination, the counting quantities subtest with all its items of good quality, the syllable rhyming subtest was eliminated and the syllable repeating subtest was elaborated with 16 items of good quality and four of fair quality, and finally, the vocabulary subtest was improved with 18 items of good quality and two items of fair quality.  

In addition, in the revised version, the subtest comparing quantities, which was very easy for children (ceiling effect), was eliminated and replaced by the subtest counting quantities that includes two skills related to numerical cognitive processing that are of vital importance for the child's preparation for his or her academic path in the first three years of schooling: enumeration and quantity comparison (Canto-López et al., 2019).  Internal structure validity remains appropriate in both the previous version of the B-PREA, as well as in the revised version. The factor analysis presented three factors in the previous version (Numerical Cognitive Processing Skills, Executive Skills and Linguistic Skills), while the revised version confirmed three factors (Executive Skills, Memory Skills and Linguistic Skills). In factor 1 "Executive Skills" five subtests were grouped (visual selective attention, matrices, story comprehension, graphomotor skills and counting quantities), which contain several skills and actions of the stage, and are congruent with theoretical models of executive functions (Doebel, 2020; Zelazo, 2020).  Doebel (2020), taking as a reference the analysis of Miyake et al. (2000), states that in the executive functions three basic cognitive functions are distinguished: inhibitory control, working memory and cognitive flexibility, from which the higher executive functions such as planning and problem solving are derived (Zelazo, 2020). From this classification, the visual selective attention subtest would be the task that could cause the least doubt in this factor; however, the subtests matrices, story comprehension, graphomotor skills and counting quantities have a common element: planning and problem solving, which in turn includes cognitive flexibility and working memory.  

These elements can be observed when the characteristics of each subtest are specifically analyzed. In the matrices subtest, the child must search, among four alternative solutions, one to complete the abstract figure, thus forcing him to search for the appropriate alternative using higher cognitive skills that also demand executive functions. In this subtest the child has to use higher cognitive skills such as size perception, perception of orientation in space, in one direction and in two directions simultaneously, analyze the figure as a whole and its parts, conceive correlative figures and deduction of relationships (Gizzonio et al., 2021). 

In story comprehension, a task similar to subtest 3 "story recall" of the Woodcock-Muñoz Battery III, achievement test (Muñoz-Sandoval et al., 2005), the child must listen attentively to the adult's writing to understand the explicit message of the text (what are the characters, what is the relationship between them, what is the story) and finally answer six literal questions in each story. This subtest has a significant relationship with oral language development, and precisely the Woodcock-Muñoz Battery III places "story recall" in the comprehension-knowledge factor, although the solution to the story comprehension subtest requires high levels of focused attention and working memory to maintain, manipulate and transform the relevant information of the story. Likewise, it is important to highlight that this subtest does not have visual support; therefore, it is a requirement for the child to listen attentively to the story and retain the relevant information about the story.  Thus, the latent variables underlying the story comprehension subtest are more executive than linguistic; however, the result could change in future research due to the size of the sample.  

In the graphomotor subtest, a task similar to subtest 6 "visuoperception" in the Child Neuropsychological Maturity Questionnaire (CUMANIN) (Portellano et al., 2000), the child is required to follow a graphic model that demands the correct grip of the pencil with his or her guiding hand, to make continuous strokes, to follow the line of the stroke correctly, to draw in the required space and to do so with the greatest possible similarity, as well as to have adequate hand-eye-space coordination. Some validation studies have shown that the visoperception subtest is a nonverbal task, and is suitable for assessing the development of executive functions in preschoolers (Parra et al., 2016; Avila, 2012). 

In the subtest counting non-symbolic quantities, a task similar to the subtest "quantitative concepts", Series A, in the Woodcock-Muñoz Battery III, achievement test (Muñoz-Sandoval et al., 2005), the child must identify quantities between 3 and 12 elements in a figure, and then search for that same quantity among four options, employing numerical cognitive processing operations such as enumeration and comparison of quantities. Behind these operations the child must maintain the goal to solve the problem, and in turn must employ various numerical, verbal and visual reasoning strategies (Spiegel et al., 2021).   

On the other hand, the tendency of the battery is to group tasks related to the child's language and memory development. In the case of language development, three subtests were used to assess the child's semantic and phonological skills, such as vocabulary, verbal working memory and syllable repetition. With respect to memory, the battery groups a third factor named working memory skills, where the characteristics of the task make possible the affirmation of the factor among the other subtests of the B-PREA-R.  The visual working memory subtest of the B-PREA-R was elaborated with similar characteristics to the "Visual Memory Span" version of the Wechsler Memory Scale Revised, being a task that has behaved as an independent factor in several investigations when performing a confirmatory or exploratory factor analysis (Fernandez et at., 2019; Zapata et al., 2019; Rosas et al., 2022; Marreros-Tananta & Guerrero-Alcedo, 2022).  

The internal consistency of the B-PREA-R showed appropriate values for a psychometric test with several subtests: alpha = .85 and alpha when the item is removed between .83 and .86. The previous version also showed appropriate values (alpha when the item is removed between .78 and .81), although it presented an internal consistency with the test-retest method between .82 and .94. Thus, it is recommended that an analysis of internal consistency through the test-retest method be carried out for future research. 

Although this study is an important contribution to the evaluation of cognitive development in the preschool stage, due to the presentation of nine subtests for the educator to apply in her educational context and to use the cut-off points to issue criteria on the child's progress, a limitation is its sample size with respect to the national population, so that in future research it should be extended to a significant sample in different provinces of the country. Similarly, other statistical measures such as the ROC curve could be applied and the cut-off point obtained could be compared with a population of children with special educational needs or with developmental limitations. 

It is recommended that future research focus on adjusting or eliminating the B-PREA-R items that showed regular discrimination. Another future task is to develop percentiles or cut-off points in a representative population of the country, with the aim of developing Cuban norms and thus extending the use of the B-PREA-R to both clinical and educational contexts. 

The B-PREA-R is a quick and easy test to apply in the educational context and presents adequate psychometric properties to evaluate cognitive development in the preschool stage, discover the child's potentialities and weaknesses and guide his cognitive preparation to start basic schooling. The update of the battery improved validity and reliability in terms of item performance (96% of items with high and good quality, while only 4% with fair quality), as well as the quantity and quality of subtests to characterize the child and assess his or her initial preparation for the beginning of the next school stage. The characteristics of the B-PREA-R allow educators to apply it in the educational context, either in the partial or final evaluative cut, therefore, it is an alternative to perform the evaluation of the preschool child according to the requirements of resolution 238/2014, regulations for the application of the school evaluation system in Cuba.   