Introduction: Frontal fibrosing alopecia (FFA) is lymphocytic 
scarring, with hair loss through the frontal implantation line of the scalp and other 
body areas.  Topical and systemic drugs, such as methotrexate (MTX), do not 
control disease activity in most of the cases showing the need for new therapies. 

Aim: To evaluate the effectiveness of methotrexate microinfusion in AFF. 

Methods: Prospective, controlled clinical trial, carried out with 17 volunteers with 
clinical and histological diagnosis of FFA. Applications of MTX by MMP® 
(microinfusion of drugs into the skin method) were made every 30 days, in a total 
of 3 applications, in the right half of the alopecia area; the other half served as a 
control. The frontal-glabella and frontal temporo-parietal measurements, 
dermoscopy photos analyzed by blind and external evaluators, patient’s 
perceptions of signs and symptoms and the Lichen Planopilaris Activity Index 
(LPPAI) were evaluated.  Total blood count and liver function tests were also 
measured. 

Results: There was a significant reduction in frontal-glabella and 
frontal temporo-parietal measurements at treated site while in the untreated site 
the AAF increased. Patient’s referred improvement of pruritus and desquamation 
but not in hair loss and local erythema.  Analysis of the dermoscopic photos and 
the LPPAI calculation did not show relevant changes. About 95% of the 
participants were satisfied or very satisfied with the results and none of them had 
alteration in the laboratory test results. 

Conclusion: The MTX application by 
MMP®, improved symptoms associated with AFF, and the frontal-glabella and 
frontal temporo-parietal measurements. This technique proved to be safe and 
well tolerated. 

Fibrosing frontal alopecia (FFA) is a progressive and chronic cicatricial 
alopecia of unknown etiology considered to be a form of the lichen planopilaris.1   
This is an inflammatory disease that affects not only scalp and eyebrows, but also 
other regions of the body causing hair loss, local pain (trichodynia) and pruritus. 
FFA occurs mainly in post-menopausal women and may be associated with the 
appearance of lichen planus pigmentosum and normochromic facial papules.2-4 
Although FFA may be detected clinically, the trichoscopy is an important 
noninvasive method that helps not only in the diagnostic evaluation showing scalp 
erythema, desquamation and perifollicular hyperchromy but, also, in the 
evaluation of the inflammation degree.5 Nevertheless, the best diagnostic tool is 
the biopsy that shows reduction in the number of terminal hair follicles in the 
dermis, perifollicular concentric fibrosis, lymphocytic infiltrate in the follicular 
isthmus, presence of necrotic keratinocytes, as well as the scarring pattern of the 
alopecia. An early diagnosis and treatment can modify the evolution of the 
disease, preventing its progression.6-10 

FFA treatment is done with oral, intralesional and topic glucocorticoids, 
antimalarials, methotrexate, acitretin, mycophenolate mophetyl, finasteride, 
naltrexone, pioglitazone, doxycycline and tofacitinib. Other used medications are 
cyclosporine, thalidomide and griseofulvin, with variable results.11-13 

Methotrexate is used orally and as subcutaneous or intramuscular 
injections. However, the systemic use of this drug is associated with several side 
effects such as gastrointestinal intolerance, hepatotoxicity, myelosuppression 
and teratogenicity.  Moreover, the bioavailability of this drug is limited due to 
important metabolization through the first liver passage.15 Local use minimizes 
such complications but the MTX, being hydro soluble, has limited capacity to 
permeate the corneal extract of the skin. In psoriasis, techniques such as 
electroporation, iontophoresis and ablative lasers have been used to increase the 
drug penetration in the skin.16 

The micro infusion of microparticles into the skin, MMP®, consists of a 
micro needling of the skin, with instillation of active ingredients through these 
needles.  The depth of the micro needling is previously adjusted according to the 
disease to be treated. Infusions of MTX through MMP® technique has shown 
good results in psoriasis with excellent tolerability. The drug when injected 
percutaneously has potent local effect and its inactivation due to first hepatic 
passage is prevented.17 

Considering that the treatment of FFA is challenging, this study aims to 
evaluate the efficacy and safety of methotrexate infusion (MTX) through the 
MMP® technique on the scalp through a prospective controlled trial. 

This study was approved by the Ethics Committee on the Use of Animals 
of Faculdade Evangélica Mackenzie do Paraná, Curitiba, PR, Brazil under CAAE 
no. 09928919100000103). To be included, patients should be older than 18 years 
of age, and have FFA diagnosis proved through clinic, trichoscopic examination 
and biopsy. Patients with abnormal liver function tests, history of chronic hepatitis, 
renal failure, hemolytic anemia and pregnant were excluded. Individuals that 
have had treatment with corticosteroid infiltration, systemic MTX or that used any 
micro infusion treatment in the last 4 months were also excluded. All included 
patients signed consent. 

Fitzpatrick phototype, hair fall in other areas of the body, frontal-glabella 
measurement and determination of frontal temporo-parietal distance.18 The 
frontal-glabella measurement evaluates the distance between the frontal hairline, 
excluding lonely hair, and the glabellar crease; the frontal temporo-parietal 
evaluates the distance between lateral eye epicanthus and implantation hairline 
at temporo-parietal region.19 These measurements were done with a flexible and 
manual ruler which was appropriate to the convex region of the forehead and 
collected at day 0 and 30 days after the last application. The examiner measuring 
these distances was blind to which side was being treated (Figure 1). 

This index evaluates symptoms (pain, pruritus and local burning 
sensation), local findings (such as desquamation, diffuse and perifollicular 
erythema), anagen traction test and alopecia progression. It ranges from 0 to 10 
where 0 is the best and 10 the worst scenario.20 LLPAI was evaluated at day 0 
and 30 days after the last treatment. 

For the trichoscopy study, the frontal line of the scalp was divided in 8 
regions, 3 cm from each other (named A, B, C, D on the right and E, F, G, H on 
the left, Figure 2). The examination was done at day 0 and 30 days after the last 
treatment and performed by 2 certified examiners, blind to the treated side using 
videodermatoscopy Dino Lite®. 

Trichoscopic findings were photographed (Canon® EOS Rebel T7 Ef-S 
18-55 F/3.5-5.6 Is II) in the above mentioned 8 regions (Figure 2) at day 0 and 30 
days after treatment. The photos were standardized with the same lighting 
conditions, in the same place and with the same distance of 30 cm from the 
participant. The pre and post treatment imagens were placed side by side (Figure 
3) and evaluated by 3 certified dermatologists, blind to treated side, using the 
following classification: -1 (worsening), 0 (no changes) and +1 (improvement). 
The following parameters were evaluated: scalp and perifollicular erythema, 
telangiectasis, desquamation and alterations in pigmentation. 

Total blood cell count, transaminases (GOT and GPT), creatinine, blood 
urea nitrogen, prothrombin time, hepatitis B and C serologies and BHCG were 
done at day 0 and 30 days after each application. 

Prior to the injection scalp, inspection and 0,2% chlorhexidine antisepsis 
were performed at the locations to be treated. Three applications of 1 ml of 
methotrexate (50 mg/2 ml) were done through MMP® technique using a Magnum 
23 tip of a Cheyenne MMP® dispositive, with 30 days of interval between 
sessions. This procedure was done by just one dermatologist that applied the 
medication in right side of the alopecia area; the left area - that served as control 
– doesn’t received any treatment.  

Procedures were performed by a single investigator, only in the half of the 
alopecia area (on the right side) serving the other half (left side), as control. A 
mild erythema was expected in the treated region. Each sector of the treated area 
(divided according to the Figure 2) received an equal amount of 0.25 ml of MTX. 
Patients were instructed not to wash the treated area for the period of 24 hrs and 
to start using SPF 30 sunscreen 72 hrs after the procedure. 

The overall degree of patient satisfaction was assessed with a 
questionnaire on the obtained results (size of the alopecia area, hair thickness, 
hair loss and density) as well as about local or systemic symptoms associated 
with the treatment. This evaluation was done 30 days after the last treatment 
session. 

Obtained data were collected in frequency and contingency tables. Central 
tendency was expressed as mean and standard deviation as all numerical data 
were parametric. Comparison of nominal data was done through Fisher and chi-
squared tests and of numerical data through student t test. The adopted 
significance was 5%. The tests were calculated using the software SPSS (version 
17.0, USA). 

Seventeen female patients were included. Table 1 shows the main 
characteristics of this sample that had mainly middle-aged individuals with 
phototype III and IV. This table also shows that the most common clinical findings 
were pruritus and desquamation and that almost 2/3 of the sample had hair loss 
in some other part of the body. 

The results of the comparison of frontal-glabella and frontal temporo-
parietal distances are on Table 2. This table shows that the frontal-glabellar 
distance and right frontal temporo-parietal distance had important reduction while 
the left front-temporo-parietal had a significative increase. 

No differences were noted in the comparison of frontal temporo-parietal 
measurements right and left prior to treatment (p=0.80) neither after treatment 
(p=0.73). The comparison of symptoms and clinical findings pre- and post-
treatment is on Table 3 that shows improvement in the pruritus and 
desquamation. Prior to treatment, the LPPAI at right side (treated area) had a 
mean value of 4.61±1.86 and after of 4.15±1.62 com p=0.45. 

The direct comparison of trichoscopic findings between treated (right) side 
(A, B, C, D) and untreated (left) side (D, E, F, G) did not show any differences, 
neither the comparison done through photography by external evaluators (all with 
p>0.05). 

The procedure was well tolerated. Table 4 shows the symptoms referred 
by the patients during and after the MTX application. 

Concerning patient’s satisfaction with treatment results the results are on 
Figure 4. None of them were unsatisfied.  

No alterations in blood cell count, liver and renal function tests were 
observed. 

There are almost no clinical trials on FFA treatment; none on MTX use 
through MMP technique, being this the first description on its use for this disease. 
MTX has been used systemically for FFA but the results are poorly documented.9 
In the review by IMHOF et al. 2 cases are documented with controversial results. 
A study from Duke University reported 3 patients with FFA treated with oral MTX 
and just 1 had stabilization of the disease. Another work by Mayo Clinic, in just 2 
patients, showed that systemic MTX was able to arrest the disease progression.21 

Arbache et al. reported the use of MTX drug delivery with MMP technique 
for vulgar psoriasis treatment in two patients, with complete remission of skin 
lesions after 3 applications.22 In the present work, this technique has shown 
improvement of pruritus and desquamation as well as it arrested the progression 
of alopecia measured by frontal-glabella and right frontal temporo-parietal 
measurements having a positive impact in patients’ well-being. 

In the present study, the LPPAI used to evaluate the treatment response, 
did not show any improvement of signs and symptoms with the proposed 
treatment. According to Andrade et al., that studied 22 patients with FFA treated 
and assessed by LPPAI and FFASI (Frontal Fibrosing Alopecia Severity Index), 
these 2 scales, if applied separately, are not satisfactory because their final 
scores do not correlate directly; they only complement each other. So, it is 
possible to conclude that a good tool to study FFA severity is not available.23 

According 
to 
the 
frontal-glabella 
and 
frontal 
temporo-parietal 
measurements, the currently used treatment avoided progression of retraction of 
the frontal glabellar implantation line. This methodology has been already used 
by Rakowska et al., while studying the use of isotretinoin and acitretin in patients 
with FFA. These authors’ study showed that this evaluation tool was able to 
demonstrate that there was no progression of AAF even after stopping 
medications.19 At present, comparing treated and untreated sides, the right 
frontal-glabella and frontal temporo-parietal distances had significant reduction 
while the left frontal temporo-parietal distance progressed, showing that these 
metric parameters are the most important for assessing the progression of this 
fibrosing disease. 

The comparison of symptoms and clinical findings before and after 
treatment demonstrated significant improvement of pruritus and desquamation, 
being those findings more present on the untreated side (on the left), which allows 
us to infer that treatment improved these complaints on the treated side (on the 
right). Erythema and hair loss were not important parameters to evaluate 
treatment response. 

Concerning the use of trichoscopy as a tool to evaluate AAF activity, no 
studies that shows correspondence between trichoscopy and histological findings 
in relation to AFF activity as been done so far. According to STARACE et al. the 
best way to assess the progression of AFF would be the presence of symptoms 
such as hair fall, itching, erythema, desquamation and increased scalp 
sensitivity.24 

As already mentioned, no studies using MMP technique in the FFA 
treatment have been done before but there is a description of the use of this 
treatment modality in other situations. Contin evaluated the use of MMP® with 5% 
Minoxidil for the treatment of androgenetic alopecia with a total of 3 monthly 
sessions, verifying that this is an effective and low complexity option, and that 
can be easily performed in an outpatient setting.25  The present study 
corroborates these findings because it also showed a comfortable and well-
tolerated technique, besides its low cost. Moreover, this technique proved to be 
quite safe, especially because it did not present any severe side effects, without 
triggering Köebner phenomenon or worsening of FFA after the MPM sessions. 
No biochemical alterations were verified after three applications of MTX in drug 
delivery with total blood count, liver and renal function were preserved suggesting 
that this procedure is safe. 

Patient’s satisfaction was also a positive item observed currently, as most 
of them were pleased with the results; the technique was well tolerated without 
causing important pain and pruritus. 

Limitations of the present study are the small sample and uncertainty as 
to the number of applications to be used as well as to the interval between them. 
The relative rarity of the disease and the strict exclusion criteria justify the small 
sample.  The ideal number of applications as well the intervals between them are 
a knowledge in construction as this is the first report on MTX use through MMP® 
in FFA. More studies are needed to answer these questions.  Another point to be 
taken into account is that the degree of systemic absorption of the MTX is 
unknown and this drug may have spread to the untreated side. 

As positive points this work shows, in an unprecedented way, the use of a 
new technique for the treatment of AAF that has good results, low cost and it is 
easily performed. 

The use of MTX in drug delivery through MMP® showed the ability to 
reduce symptoms and to avoid progression of AAF. Trichoscopy and LPPAI were 
not good instruments to evaluate treatment response but the frontal glabella and 
bilateral frontal temporo-parietal measurements were satisfactory. The procedure 
was safe and well tolerated offering a new option for treatment of AFF patients. 
