Atlhetes' mood states may vary depending on match contexts. This study analyzes present 
mood states variations over time in 18 male youth soccer players (Mage: 15.4 ± 0.266 years) 
during a competitive season. The Present Mood States List (PMSL) was applied for the 
assessment of present mood states 40 minutes before each Event in a sequence of training 
sessions and matches. The presence values of each PMSL Factor were calculated in each 
Event for each soccer player. Specific patterns of changes in mood states have been detected 
over time. Furthermore, depending on which Event was related to a specific match, some 
mood states differed in their pattern of change. The importance of including the dynamic 
component of time as an influential variable in athlete mood states changes is discussed. 

A subjective emotional experience - also understood as feeling or sensation - is the 
essence of an emotion, and its objective manifestations is observed in its influences on 
behaviour or by physiological signals from the body or brain are indirect indicators of these 
internal experiences. As a consequence, the best way to access these feelings is through 
verbal reports (LeDoux & Hofmann, 2018). Measures of subjective states assessed through 
verbal reports of the athletes, can describe psychological conditions (Bueno & Souza, 2019).  

Engelmann (1986, p. 121) define mood states as a “fundamental patterns of general 
functioning and orientation”, representing  “the effect upon a person of his own configuration 
of activity”, approaching what is understood as feeling in everyday language (Bueno & 
Souza, 2019; Engelmann, 1986). Altough the relevance to investigate the subjective athletes’ 
experience presupone the study of a wide range of states, there are a primacy in investigations 
of negative aspects such as depression, anxiety and stress, mainly because these aspects could 
have a detrimental effect upon sports performance (Frame & Reichin, 2019; Rocha & Osório, 
2018).  

Studies about athletes’ mood states have followed the same tradition, particularly 
using the Profile of Mood States – POMS (Chennaoui et al., 2016; Morgan, 1980), which has 
just one positive factor (Vigor) and five negative factors (Tension, Depression, Confusion, 
Angry and Fatigue), and has been pointed out as a limitation for the advancement of 
theoretical models and methods of intervention in this field (Hagtvet & Hanin, 2007; Hanin, 
2012; Hernández, 2016; Prapavessis, 2000). Even with that, POMS has been widely used to 
investigate mood states in sport over the world.  

Applicable instruments for the investigation of this wide range of mood states in 
sports contexts are necessary. The Present Mood States List (PMSL) elaborated by 
Engelmann (1986, 2001) is a Brazilian instrument which involves positive and negative 
mood states, resulting from wide empirical research performed in Brazil and could 
probabilistically give adequate access to subjective states of people. PMSL measures the 
presence of a person’s mood states at the time when is responding and has been used in the 
investigation of  Present Mood States in sport in Brazil (Bueno & Di Bonifácio, 2007, 2009; 
Bueno & Souza, 2019).  

The understanding about how, when and why these feelings influence athletes remains 
unclear and contradictory, with “a scarcity of empirical evidence to support the timing, and 
content of psychological skill application during the time preceding competition” (Hagan et 
al., 2017a). For instance, Vega Marcos et al. (2008) described the mood states profile of 
professional soccer players assessed with the POMS in four precompetition events during the 
play-offs of a national championship and did not find significant differences in this profile, 
between the beginning and the end of the championship phase period. This study suggests the 
stability of mood states along time within the same championship phase. Torres-Luque, et al. 
(2013) analyzed the relationship between the evolution of training load, days of competition 
and mood states with the POMS in elite judo athletes during a competitive period and 
detected effects of training load and competitive cycles on mood states, Fatigue in particular. 
In their study, Torres-Luque et al. (2013) extended the evaluation of mood states to training 
sessions, without limiting it to the days of competition. Box et al. (2018) examined mood 
states during a consecutive 5-week fitness competition (CrossFit®  Open) involving five 
separate CrossFit® workouts. They data suggests that baseline mood (in a controlled setting) 
and pre-workout mood did not differ across the 5-weeks of the competition, In addition, they 
found certain negative moods increases immediately following the workout (i.e., Fatigue), 
but these values declined to pre-workout values during recovery, while feelings of Vigor 
remained elevated throughout the entire session.  

Hagan et al. (2017b) examined the competitive anxiety responses of elite and semi-
elite table tennis athletes as temporal events, based on the multidimensional anxiety theory as 
a framework (i.e. Martens et al., 1990) using the time-to-event paradigm. This paradigm takes 
into account the closeness of a relevant event (for instance, a championship match) as crucial 
aspect to modulate how athletes feel before the competition. Present Mood States were 
closely related to the different context conditions such as training load (Torres-Luque et al., 
2013), championship phase (Di Bonifácio, 2013; Vega Marcos et al., 2008), perception of 
one’s performance (Lewis et al., 2017), location of the match (R. C. da Silva, 2013), injury 
incidence (Olmedilla, Ortega & Gómez, 2014), sports performance (Borges-Hernández, 
2016) and match outcome (Hassmén & Blomstrand, 1995; Nogueira, 2009). 

Mood states of soccer players have also been studied using the PMSL (see Bueno & 
Souza, 2019 for a review). Nogueira (2009) described the profile of Present Mood States as a 
function of the positions of youth soccer players and related to the competition phase. The 
results showed a common profile of mood states for all athletes immediately before the 
match, but differences between before and after the game, as well as the presence of specific 
mood states for the different positions of the athletes and the influence of the match outcome 
on post-match mood states. Dias-Silva (2013) revealed a common Present Mood States 
profile for soccer players and a specific Present Mood State profile for their positions, which 
were related to the behaviour of the players during the match.  

The investigation of the Present Mood States and its changes over time is relevant in 
order to help construct the periodization of training and competition and also in order to 
permit psychological intervention aiming at a better preparation of the athlete for 
competition. Although, mood states seem to be stable during a competitive period, as 
suggested by the conclusions of Vega Marcos et al. (2008) and Box et al. (2018), the 
presence of different stimuli and contexts (such as phase of competition, field position, 
location, environment, social contacts and match outcomes), may modify the intensity and 
valence of these states as shown by Bueno and Di Bonifácio (2009), Nogueira (2009), Torres-
Luque et al. (2013) and Hagan et al. (2017b). The aim of the present study was to examine 
wheter Present Mood States of youth soccer players’ changes or not during a competitive 
period (sequence of matches and trainning sessions) as a function of the closeness of the 
match.   

Participated voluntairily 18 Brazilian soccer players (Mage= 15.4 years; SD = 0. 266) 
belonging to a U-15 male soccer team. This soccer team was disputing the second phase of a 
state championship and accepted to participate in the study after authorization of their 
parents. This study has been approved by the Ethics Committee of the institution responsible 
for the research1.  

To acess the athletes’ Present Mood States, PMSL was used. In PMSL, mood states 
are accessed through 40 locutions presented in the first singular person that denote these 
mood states. A 5-point likert-type scale located at the side of each locution contains degrees 
of intensity to be responded by the participant.  These 40 locutions are divided into 12 
Factors, take into account the hedonic value and activation level of each item. In order to 
facilitate the description and identification of the data, the authors who have used the PMSL 
in the sporting context (Picoli, 2016; Silva, 2017) have named the following factors from the 
representative locutions: I—Humiliation/Anger, II—Fatigue, III—Hope, IV—
Limerence/Empathy, V—Physiological Response, VI—Repulsion, VII—Interest, VIII—
Surprise, IX—Hunger, X—Disregard/Envy, XI—Receptivity, and XII—Serenity. 

All athletes responded in the locker room to the PMSL (Engelmann, 1986) in three 
conditions: about 40 minutes before the last training session preceding the match (Training-
Previous condition), about 40 minutes before the match (Match condition) and about 40 
minutes before the first training after the match (Training-Post condition). Data were 
collected during three consecutive championship rounds, for a total of three Training-
Previous condition (TR-PRE), three Matches condition (MATCH) and three Training-Post 
condition (TR-POST) assessments.  

Players were divided into four groups, each referring to their field position: 
Goalkeepers (n=2), Defenders (n=7), Midfielders (n=7) and Forwards (n=2). The presence 
values of each PMSL factor, as proposed by Engelmann (1986), were calculated multiplying 
the value assigned by the participant on the scale at the side of each locution by its value of 
correlation (charge) with each factor. To permit comparisons envolving factors with diferent 
number of correlated locutions a standardization was done to put each value of presence of 
each PMSL factor in a 0-1 scale. This standardization was done this way: In each PMSL 
factor, the maximum possible value was calculated by multiplying all its positive charges by 
5 (maximum value of the PMSL scale at the side of the locution) and its negative charges by 
1 (minimum value of the LEAP scale at the side of the locution) and the mean of the values 
obtained was calculated. For the minimum value the opposite was done: the positive charges 
were multiplied by 1 and the negative ones multiplied by 5 and the mean of the obtained 
values was calculated. From there, the minimum value obtained was adjusted to 0 (zero) and 
the maximum value was adjusted as well, corresponding to the scale proportion (for instance, 
if a minimum value was adjusted from 2 to 0, the maximum value was deducted by 2 as 
well).  To the maximum value adjustment to 1 (one), it was divided by itself. Thus, the 
presence value obtained in the original scale (1 to 5) was also divided by the maximum value 
adjusted, having the value of presence of the PMSL factor. This scale standardization 
procedure was done for all presence values of all participants at all events. The mean values 
of presence of each PMSL factor were considered for statistical analysis.  

Also, statistical analysis used the value of the Event Series, calculated by the mean 
value of the presence of PMSL factors in the TR-PRE, MATCH and TR-POST for the same 
round of the championship. Kolmogorov-Smirnov test was done and presented a normal 
distribution (p=0.068). Data were compared by analysis of variance (ANOVA) multivarieted 
with repeated measures of mixed-model. The post hoc Bonferroni test was used when 
significant differences were detected in the data. The level of significance was set at p ≤ .05 
and the calculations were made using the SPSS 20.0 software for Windows.  

The data reported refer to the comparisons of the mean values of all participants as a 
single group, since there were not statistically differences between values of the presence of 
PMSL factors as a function of player’s field position. Factors I (Humiliation/Anger), VI 
(Repulsion), VIII (Surprise), IX (Hunger) and X (Disregard/Envy) showed very low presence 
values (> 0.30) throughout the study.  

Comparison of the presence values of each Factor of a same Series between Events 
revealed changes in mood states as a function of time course (Figure 1). Temporal patterns of 
changes in mood states were detected, represented by Factors II (Fatigue), VII (Interest) and 
XII (Serenity). Factor II (Fatigue) presence values were higher for TR-PRE than for MATCH 
(p=0.001) and MATCH values were also lower than TR-POST values (p=0.002). For Factor 
VII (Interest) presence values, TR-PRE values were higher than TR-POST values (p=0.008) 
and MATCH values were also higher than TR-POST values (p=0.000). For Factor XII 
(Serenity), TR-PRE values were higher than TR-POST values in Series 1 (p= 0.023) and 3 
(p=0.023), but were lower than TR-POST values in Series 2 (p=0.034). Thus, TR-PRE values 
were higher for Factor II (Fatigue) compared to MATCH values and MATCH values were 
higher for Factors VII (Interest) and XII (Serenity) compared to TR-POST values. TR-POST 
values of Factor II (Fatigue) were higher than MATCH values. 

Comparison of the values for each Factor between Series revealed a change in mood 
states as function of time (Figure 2). Temporal patterns of mood state changes were detected 
regarding Factors IV (Limerence/Empathy) and VII (Interest). Higher Factor IV 
(Limerence/Empathy) presence values were detected for Series 1 compared to Series 2 
(p=0.012). Factor VII (Interest) presence values were higher for Series 1 compared to Series 
2 (p=0,003) and also to Series 3 (being marginally significant in the latter case, with p = 
0.055). Thus Factor IV (Limerence/Empathy) presence values were higher in Series 1 than in 
Series 2 and Factor VII (Interest) presence values were also higher than those of Series 2 and 
3. 

Statistical analysis for the comparison of presence values between Events and the 
different Series revealed temporal patterns of change both as a function of Event and Series 
of Factors III (Hope) and XI (Receptivity). This means that an interaction was detected 
between Event and Series, showing that the presence values of the PMSL Factors depended 
on the type of Event and to which Series they belonged (Figure 3). The presence values of 
Factor III (Hope) in TR-PRE of Series 1 were higher than those of Series 2 (p=0.001) and 3 
(p=0.000) and the TR-PRE values of Series 2 were higher than those of Series 3 (p=0.001). 
These data indicate a progressive decline of Factor III (Hope) from Series to Series. Analysis 
of Factor III (Hope) also showed higher presence values in Series 1 MATCH than in Series 2 
(p=0.001) and 3 MATCHES (p=0.039), revealing the same pattern of decline along the Series 
of competition.  Factor XI (Receptivity) showed the same pattern of reduction of TR-PRE 
presence values in Series 1 compared to Series 2 (p=0.001) and 3 (p=0.000), as well as higher 
presence values in Series 1 MATCHES compared to Series 2 (p=0.005) and in Series 2 
MATCHES compared to Series 3 (p=0.028). It can be seen that Factor VII (Interest) also 
showed statistically significant differences depending on Event and Series, but no interaction 
between these variables. 

Factor V (Physiologic) was the one showing the greatest change during the study 
since the differences detected showed a pattern of Factor presence over the time course of the 
sequence of Series of Events, side by side with specific changes in Series 3. The TR-POST 
presence values were higher than MATCH and TR-PRE values for all 3 Series. In Series 3, 
some changes were detected in the presence values of this Factor compared to Series 1 and 2. 
TR-PRE presence values were higher in Series 1 (p=0.007) and 2 (p=0.000) than those of the 
MATCHES of both series, but the TR-PRE value of Series 3 was lower than that of MATCH 
3 (p=0,000). The MATCH presence values differed between the 3 Series, with the Series 2 
MATCH value being lower than those of Series 1 and 3. Thus, analysis of the interaction 
between Series and Event revealed a common pattern for the presence of mood states Factors 
along the temporal sequence for all 3 Series, although there were some significant and 
specific changes in Series 3 compared to Series 1 and 2. 

The results of the present study, considering the time course between training sessions 
and matches, are in according to time-to-event paradigm (Hagan et al., 2017b), which these 
event are an important influence to Present Mood States variations as well as the influence of 
match outcome. Although the match outcome was not the aim of the present study, the 
discussion of the results takes into consideration the fact that the participant team was 
defeated in all matches.  

Patterns of change in Present Mood States represented by PMSL Factors II (Fatigue), 
VII (Interest) and XII (Serenity) were detected between Events (TR-PRE, MATCH and TR-
POST), suggesting that the temporal patterns of change in these mood states are repeated 
along time. While the presence value of Factor VII (Interest) increased with proximity to the 
match, the presence of Factor II (Fatigue) decreased concomitantly. Torres-Luque et al. 
(2013) showed that the value of the Fatigue Factor of the POMS also decreased before the 
competition, then increasing after it, as expected after physical and mental effort during a 
sequence of training sessions and matches. Nogueira (2009) reported that youth soccer 
players showed high values of presence in the locution “I am tired”, which is the one with the 
highest load in Factor II (Fatigue), immediately after the matches, regardless of the outcome. 
Although in the present study the evaluation was performed 48 hours after the matches, as 
recorded in the TR-POST, the high presence of Factor II (Fatigue) after the competition 
persisted. Russell et al. (2019) highlighted an inconsistency of studies about mental fatigue in 
sports, especially its influence on sports performance and stressed the need to “improving 
the ecological validity of research in the area of mental fatigue and sport”. A possibility to do 
this advance, according to them, is to investigate the effect of mental fatigue on performance 
over a season. 

Factor VII (Interest) seems to be a Factor present about 40 minutes before the match, 
as also shown by Bueno and Di Bonifácio (2007), Dias-Silva (2013), Di Bonifácio (2013) 
and Silva (2013). Factor VII (Interest) can be considered related to organic activation and 
motivation. Pujals and Vieira (2002) reported that a specific interest (improving  
performance) is present in young soccer athletes, which is a motivational Factor linked to the 
need of achievement (Brunstein & Heckhausen, 2018) and to intrinsic and extrinsic 
motivation (Brunstein, 2018).  Gea Garcia et al. (2016) showed that the temporal proximity 
of competitive matches causes an increased intensity of Vigor and Tension (POMS Factors) 
in college athletes. In the current study, the highest presence values of Factor XII (Serenity) 
were detected temporally more distant from the matches. It is important to note that the level 
of competition and the age range are different between these studies and an investigation of 
the influence of these aspects to the presence of this Factor will be relevant. 

Presence values of Factors IV (Limerence/Empathy) and VII (Interest) differed in 
their patterns of change according to a Series of Events, as shown by the mean presence 
values of PMSL Factors related to the same match. The mean presence values of Factors IV 
(Limerence/Empathy) and VII (Interest) decreased as soon as the chances of classification for 
the next championship phase became improbable (between Series 1 and 2 Matches), with the 
team already eliminated from the competition after the second match and participating in the 
remaining matches only for a perfunctory appearance. The relationship between these Factors 
within this context can be understood in terms of the interaction between group cohesion 
(Lafferty et al., 2017) and achievement goals (Mascret et al., 2015). The elimination may 
have affected group cohesion, explaining the reduced value of Factor IV 
(Limerence/Empathy). Thus, these data suggest that, regardless of this unfavorable context, 
the mood states related to these PMSL Factors are commonly observed in competitive 
collective sport experience. 

Depending on the type of Event and on the Series to which it belonged, Factors III 
(Hope) and XI (Receptivity) showed specific patterns of change. The mean presence value of 
Factor III (Hope) was reduced as soon as the possibility of the team to be disqualified 
increased or was already defined. Even so, this Factor was present in all Events of the study 
period. This PMSL Factor was present in the early international competition phases among 
elite voleyball players, although the values did not continue to be high during the course of 
the competition (Di Bonifácio, 2013). Pujals and Vieira (2002) also observed that Hope was a 
positive psychological Factor among youth soccer players, influencing performance in the 
field. 

Nogueira (2009) and Silva (2013) showed high presence values in locution with a 
greater correlation load with Factor XI (Receptivity) after the matches in which they were 
defeated for midfielders. In the present study, no difference was detected between groups 
regarding this PMSL Factor. This may have occurred due to the fact that, in the present 
category (U-15), unlike adult categories examined in other studies, players had little 
specialization for each function to be performed in the field. However, this factor was found 
to be present after the defeats even though its presence value was reduced compared to the 
Match values.  

Factor V (Physiologic) showed the greatest changes during the competition. It is 
possible that the locutions correlated with this Factor (“I feel cold”, “I feel warm” and “I am 
thirsty”) are highly sensitive to situational and contextual conditions. In this study, 
experimenter can identify contextual conditons, as related to the chances of classification in 
the championship. Besides, situational conditions was observed, as training sessions at times 
performed on a synthetic grass field and at others on a natural grass field, the meteorological 
conditions during the Events. These conditions, however, were not experimentally controlled 
in the present study. 

Mood states analyzed in the present study showed differences that could be attributed 
to the match as an important temporal reference for these changes. Time-perspective can be 
an important aspect to be studied in terms of predict how these mood states changes over time 
(Stolarski et al., 2019). The assessment with two-day distance to the match revealed diverse 
mood states during the present study. Other studies have shown a relationship between the 
mood states of athletes and the time course during a competitive period. Using the POMS at 
different time points, Keikha et al.(2015) evaluated the mood states of university athletes 
acting in different sports and showed that the mood states profile of the participants was 
different only one day before the competitions and remained stable when evaluated one hour 
and one week before the competition (cf. Vega Marcos et al., 2008). Hassmén and 
Blomstrand (1995) assessed the mood states profile of soccer players with the POMS about 
one hour before the match, immediately after a match and two hours after a match and 
detected differences in the mood states profile of the athletes between these different time 
points. These differences were related to the results obtained by the team in the matches 
evaluated.  

Some elements such as the chance of classification and the outcome of matches 
(defeat in particular) influenced the way the Present Mood States changed during the present 
study period. It was perceived by changes in the presence of PMSL Factors showing the 
increased intensity of the locutions involving Present Mood States of negative hedonic value 
such as “I am angry”, “I am sad”, “I feel humiliated” and “I feel ashamed” after the matches 
and by the reduction of presence values of Factors III (Hope) and VII (Interest) at the end of 
the study period, since the team no longer had any chance of classification. Studies report that 
defeat elicits negative emotions and reduces positive emotions among the athletes after a 
competition (Ahmadi et al., 2015; Lewis et al., 2017; Rubio, 2006) and that the intensity of 
negative mood states changes as the competition progresses (Bueno & Di Bonifácio, 2007). 
Further studies may confirm how other results (a tie and winning) will influence the presence 
of specific Present Mood States and their changes along a competititive period. 

In the present study, analysis of Present Mood States revealed significant differences 
in the their presence values along the time sequence of the competition, suggesting that 
investigation with an instrument such as the PMSL, made in Brazil with Brazilian population, 
may be more appropriate to investigate these aspects. PMSL contains more positive and 
negative mood states than other instruments like POMS, increasing the spectrum of 
possibilities of relationships with other variables of the sport context linked to the changes in 
Present Mood States of the athletes. The applicability of PMSL to investigate Present Mood 
States is very quickly and was compared to confirm the concordance level of other 
instruments as PANAS (Pires et al., 2013). The results agreed with those obtained with the 
PMSL by Bueno and Di Bonifácio (2007), Dias-Silva (2013), Di Bonifácio (2013), Nogueira 
(2009), Silva (2013). The presence of Factors III (Hope) and VII (Interest) and of the locution 
“I am happy” (a locution negatively correlated with Factor I - Humiliation/Anger, decreasing 
the presence value of this Factor) reveals a common mood states among Soccer, Football, 
Volleyball and Futsal athletes before the matches.  

The present study expands the investigation of Present Mood States of athletes by 
assessing them not only immediately before a match, but also during the training sessions, 
allowing the analysis of changes in these mood states as a function of time course during a 
competitive period. Martini (2000 pp. 103) pointed out that “The psychological preparation 
of sportsmen (...) should be based on systematic interventions carried out according to a 
program that will accompany and consider the succession of sport events”. The data obtained 
in the present study permit a better understanding of how, when and which mood states 
change, providing better support to the planning and implementation of interventions in the 
preparation of athletes for competition. Thus, it is important to include the dynamic 
component of temporality as a variable affecting the models of variation of 
neuropsychological processes (Staddon & Bueno, 1991), especially in investigations of 
subjective aspects such as Present Mood States within the sport context. 
