Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has now resulted in 
a pandemic since the first case was reported in Wuhan, China in 
late 2019, despite global efforts to prevent its spread. According 
to an article published in April 2020, the first case of COVID-19 
caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2) in Brazil, was confirmed on February 26, 2020 by 
the Ministry of Health (MH). The patient was a 61-year-old man/
woman from Sao Paulo, who recently arrived from Lombardy, 
northern Italy, where an outbreak occurred with a significant number 
of cases. Since the first case, the MH has disseminated technical 
recommendations and protocols to all states of the Federation1-4.

In Piauí, a state located in northeastern Brazil, the first suspected 
case of COVID-19 was reported on February 27, 2020. The first case 
was confirmed on March 19, 2020, and until the March 31, there 
were a total of 18 confirmed cases and 4 deaths due to COVID-19, 
with a fatality rate of 22.2%; two of these deaths occurred in 
Teresina, the capital of Piauí, where most of the confirmed cases 
are concentrated (16/18).

Teresina is the most populous city in Piauí (approximately 
865 thousand inhabitants), with high connectivity by roads to 
other regions of the state and the only airport with direct domestic 
flights to several states in Brazil. In addition, it is the main site for 
highly complex care services in the developed Entre Rios region, 
located in the mid-north region of Piauí, with the remaining regions 
having fragile, fragmented, and vulnerable healthcare systems. This 
imposes an additional burden and challenge for health systems and 
economies in the countryside regions of the state in the face of the 
imminent scenario of SARS-CoV-2 dissemination.

Faced with the first suspected cases of COVID-19 in mid-
February, the state government of Piauí developed the State 
Contingency Plan and instituted the Crisis Management Committee, 
both with the purpose of recommending and monitoring measures 
such as social-distancing and the suspension of collective activities, 
such as public events and school activities. On March 16, 2020, 
through Decree 18,884/2020, the government recommended the 
intensification of measures such as the suspension of collective 
activities or sporting, cultural, artistic, political, scientific, 
commercial and religious events; suspension of school classes; 
monitoring of suspicious cases; isolation for 14 days of travelers 
or those who had contact with confirmed cases; and the adoption 
of sanitary measures. 

In the meantime, the country published Decree 18,895, on March 
19, 2020, declaring a state of public emergency, due to the serious 
public health crisis resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, and 
its repercussions on public finances, thus enabling the enactment of 
exceptional measures to contain the spread of the disease in Brazil. 
In addition, Decrees 18,901 of March 19 and 18,902 of March 23, 
2020 were published with measures to suspend economic activities 
due to the movement of people.

However, specific measures related to the health sector must 
be implemented, given that the state has 11 health regions and 
227 intensive care unit (ICU) beds, of which 149 (65.6%) are 
concentrated in Teresina in the Entre Rios Region (Table 1), and 
100% of the diagnoses by reverse transcriptase- C-reactive protein 
(RT-PCR) are made at the Central Public Health Laboratory, which 
is also located in the capital.

It is noteworthy that COVID-19 is not the only public health 
challenge today. Until March 2020, 441,224 probable cases (incidence 
coefficient of 209.9 cases per 100,000 inhabitants) of dengue were 
reported in the country. The Northeast Region had an incidence of 
49.5 cases/100,000 inhabitants, with an increasing trend, but still 
within the expected level (endemic channel). Simultaneously, 2,184 
suspected cases of measles were reported, of which 338 (15.5%) were 
confirmed (incidence rate of 0.8/100,000 inhabitants). In this difficult 
epidemiological scenario, there is a clear expectation of witnessing a 
measles, dengue, and COVID-19 syndemia, among other conditions 
that afflict the Brazilian population5-7.

In this context, the healthcare system in Piauí, like other regions 
of Brazil and the world, is not prepared to face this pandemic that 
is growing at alarming rates across the world. The rapid spread of 
the epidemic is partly due to the delay in testing suspected cases, 
providing results, and isolating patients, in addition to the failure 
to protect healthcare professionals, resulting in dissemination from 
healthcare providers8.

Therefore, the government must immediately pay attention to 
the need to expand healthcare infrastructure to combat COVID-19. 
It is necessary for the population and healthcare professionals to 
be guided to adopt the preventive measures recommended by 
experts and public health officials. The population must perform 
hand hygiene and avoid closed environments and avoid contact 
with people from regions with COVID-19 outbreaks. Healthcare 
professionals should use protective glasses or face shields,  
surgical/N95 masks, disposable aprons, and procedure gloves and 
always wash their hands, especially when aiding suspected or 
confirmed cases of COVID-19. In this scenario, there is a need for 
governments to establish their commitment to offering the entire 
population the mitigation measures recommended to overcome 
this crisis9. In addition, the present scenario highlights the need to 
strengthen the Brazilian Unified Health System as well as the need 
for massive investment in research, technology, and innovation to 
effectively combat public health emergencies in our country.

The authors gratefully acknowledge Dr. Carlos Henrique Nery 
Costa for his collaboration. 
