Since December 2019, an epidemic caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) occurred unexpectedly in Wuhan, Hubei province, China 
and quickly spread from Wuhan to other areas of China and other countries. The World 
Health Organization named this new coronavirus disease COVID-19, resulting from the 
combination of the words Corona, Viruses and Disease, with an indication of the year 
2019, the year of its appearance. The General Directorate of Health of Portugal states 
that the transmission of COVID-19 can occur through respiratory droplets, direct contact 
with respiratory secretions, infected feces or contaminated surfaces and by air, through aerosol generators(1).

There are relatively few reported cases of COVID-19 infection in children, compared to the total number 
of cases in the general population. In February 2020, 2.4% of the 75,465 cases in China (confirmed and 
suspected) occurred in children, as well as in Italy with 1.2%(2) and 5% in the United States of America(3). Data 
from the General Directorate of Health of Portugal, from March 29, 2020, show that 1% of children under 10 
years old and 2.3% of adolescents between 11 and 19 years old were presenting COVID-19. At the moment, 
there are no cases of death in this age group(1). One of the explanations for this disease not being prevalent in 
children may be because they are less exposed to the virus and have less indications for testing for SARS CoV-
2 because, in most cases, they have mild symptoms similar to those of a common flu. The function of innate 
immunity to respiratory tract infection is greater in children than in adults, because the adaptive immune 
response in children is superior and the protein that binds to the angiotensin-converting enzyme is less mature 
in younger people, which makes such binding difficult. Thus, children's ability to trigger an acute inflammatory 
response to SARS-CoV-2 is weak, which can also contribute to a better outcome. Such particularities, however, 
do not eliminate the possibility of serious cases and even death, especially in children with comorbidities(4).

Regarding mother-fetus intrauterine vertical transmission, there is still no scientific evidence to demonstrate 
its existence. COVID-19 was also not detected in breast milk(5). However, the main concern is whether an infected 
mother can transmit the virus through respiratory droplets. Thus, breastfeeding during maternal COVID-19 infection 
is not contraindicated by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Royal College of Obstetricians and 
Gynaecologists, but precautions must be taken to prevent the spread of the virus to the newborn, including washing 
your hands before touching it and wearing a face mask. In the case of breast milk extraction, the recommendations 
for cleaning the breast pumps after each use must be strictly observed(6).

Although the immediate risk of COVID-19 in children is low, it is important to monitor the situation and its 
evolution. At this stage, the concern about COVID-19 can make children and their families anxious. Several countries 
have implemented social confinement and distancing, which means maintaining a safe distance (approximately 
one meter) from others and avoiding meeting spaces with more than five people. In case of confinement at home, 
parents are often the best and closest resource for their children to seek help. Games and play can be strategies 
for distraction and communication with children. Toys should be cleaned and disinfected with soap and water, a 
disinfectant or sodium hypochlorite solution (10 ml/1 liter of water). This virus is inactivated after five minutes(7).

The current outbreak of COVID-19 remains serious worldwide and has been designated as a Public Health 
emergency and an international concern of the World Health Organization. It is highly contagious and, although the 
number of reported sick children is small at the moment, they are also vulnerable to infection. The importance of 
raising awareness and strengthening infection control measures can never be overemphasized.
