Rev Col Bras Cir 47:e20202568
DOI: 10.1590/0100-6991e-20202568
	
INTRODUCTION
O
ver one million cases of the SARS-CoV-2 virus 
have been confirmed worldwide, the death toll 
exceeding 50,000 people1. The exposure of health 
professionals to this new virus is an important issue. The 
first reports from Wuhan province, China, described 
infection rates of up to 29% among healthcare 
professionals before the use of personal protective 
equipment (PPE) was fully regulated2. There are several 
protocols on the correct use of PPE during aerosol-
generating procedures. However, there is no specific 
guidance on how to proceed in cases requiring chest 
drainage with active air leak in positive, suspected 
and even asymptomatic COVID-19 patients, the latter 
corresponding to about 80% of patients3. Since we are 
facing a pandemic of a previously unknown disease and 
there are not enough diagnostic tests for mass testing 
in Brazil, every precaution must be considered when 
approaching any patient.
The SARS-CoV-2 virus, which causes the 
COVID-19 disease, has been shown to be viable in 
aerosol form and is transmitted by droplets4. During the 
pandemic, there are patients who need chest drainage, 
whether in wards or intensive care units. Although 
drains may be inserted with less risk of viral spread for 
simple pleural effusions, there is concern that there 
may be a high risk of aerosol production in cases of 
pneumothorax with active air leakage, whether these 
are primary, secondary, spontaneous or iatrogenic.
Traditional 
chest 
drainage 
water-seal 
collectors have an outlet that allows the coupling of 
a negative pressure system. If it is not connected to 
suction, the outlet is opened to the atmosphere. When 
the air escapes into a chest drainage collector, it causes 
the inner liquid to bubble. Given the aerosolization that 
is likely to occur inside the drain collector, it escapes 
through this outlet and this can be an important way 
of environment contamination and viral transmission5.
	
	
TECHNICAL REPORT
This proposal aims to serve as a tool and to 
assist surgeons in the treatment of conditions that require 
1 - Mario Penna Institute / Luxemburgo Hospital, Thoracic Surgery Service - Belo Horizonte - MG - Brazil 2 - Alberto Cavalcanti Hospital - Foundation
Minas Gerais State Hospital/FHEMIG - Belo Horizonte - MG - Brazil 3 - Federal University of Minas Gerais, Hospital das Clínicas, Service of Thoracic 
Surgery - Belo Horizonte - MG - Brazil
Safety model for chest drainage in pandemic by COVID-19
Modelo de segurança para realização de drenagem torácica na pandemia pela 
COVID-19
Erlon de Avila Carvalho1,2      ; Marina Varela Braga de Oliveira3     .
Technical note
A B S T R A C T
Over one million cases of the SARS-CoV-2 virus have been confirmed worldwide, with the death toll exceeding 50,000 people. An import-
ant issue to be addressed concerns the exposure of health professionals to this new virus. The first reports from Wuhan province, China, 
described infection rates of up to 29% among healthcare professionals before the use of personal protective equipment (PPE) was fully 
regulated. There are several protocols on the correct use of PPE during aerosol-generating procedures. However, there is no specific guid-
ance on how to proceed in cases of need for chest tubes in patients with positive COVID-19 active air leak. The objective of this work is to 
assist surgeons of the most diverse specialties during the chest drainage of a patient with COVID-19 and to avoid a risk of contamination 
to the professional and the environment.
Keywords: Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome. Thoracostomy. Thoracic Surgery. Coronavirus.
2
Carvalho
Safety model for chest drainage in pandemic by COVID-19
Rev Col Bras Cir 47:e20202568
thoracic drainage during the COVID-19 pandemic. It is 
based on review of the literature published so far, in the 
opinion of individuals specialized in the thoracic surgery 
field, and not necessarily on evidence-based instructions. 
We recognize that management strategies are dynamic 
and must be determined individually, depending on the 
equipment and tools available at each institution.
Ideally, one should use closed digital drainage 
systems regularized in Brazil and marketed by the industry. 
As this is not the reality of most hospitals, we propose all 
steps of a safe and viable alternative, aiming to reduce the 
contamination of the environment and the exposure of 
the assistant team.
The main mechanism for preventing the spread 
of particles would be the use of the High Efficiency 
Particulate Arrestance (HEPA) filter. The HEPA filter was 
developed in 1940 to hinder the spread of cancerous 
contaminants through the air in the Manhattan Project, 
responsible for the production of the first atomic bombs 
in history6.
Made of fiberglass, HEPA filters are designed to 
retain much smaller particles and impurities than ordinary 
filters. The diameter of the fibers, the speed of the particles 
and the thickness of the filter are considerable factors 
when analyzing the HEPA filters. They work in three ways: 
interception, impact and diffusion. The particles adhere to 
the fiber after following the air flow and being impacted 
by the fibers, which causes them to stick to the filter7,8.
Common filters cannot keep viruses and 
bacteria, while the HEPA is able to capture 99.97% of 
air impurities. The filtering capacity that justifies this 
percentage is that the HEPA filter can filter particles up 
to 0.3 micrometers (µm)6,7, which can be an important 
defense against aerosolization. The aerosol particles are 
smaller than five micrometers4, so the HEPA filter would 
be an important barrier against the dispersion of aerosols 
in the environment.
Necessary material:
• 3 KITS of personal protective equipment 
(PPE): hat, N95 mask, 2 pairs of long-sleeved gloves, 
waterproof apron / cloak, goggles, face shield;
• Chest drain of the desired size and collector;
• Orotracheal tube number 7 or 8;
• HEPA filter;
• Device to close the collector’s communication 
with the environment if it does not have its own 
mechanism;
• 1 sterile hemostatic forceps;
• Sterile drapes;
• Lidocaine 1%;
• 10 mL syringe;
• 40x12 and 25x8 mm needles;
• Scalpel blade number 15;
• Small surgery kit;
• Surgical suture Vicryl® 1 and Nylon® 2.0 (or 
sutures of choice in the service);
• Dressing material: gauze and micropore 
bandage.
The procedure should be performed using the 
PPE recommended by the regulations of each service for 
contact with COVID-19 positive patients and other care 
during the pandemic. Our recommendations are use of 
personal protective equipment (PPE) for aerosolization, 
such as N95 mask, cap, goggles, and face shield, 
disposable waterproof apron and long-barreled gloves; 
foot protectors may also be recommended in some 
services.
• Prior preparing of the drainage system in a 
sterile manner, with the use of a collection bottle with a 
5 cm water column (Figure 1);
• Use of the tracheal tube connector in the 
drain outlet that has a latex tip (Figure 2);
• Occlude the other outlet with a preferred 
device to ensure a seal, such as 1 mL syringe plunger; 
some drains already have their own sealing mechanism 
(Figure 3);
• Connect the HEPA filter to it (Figure 4);
• Measure how many of the drain length in 
centimeters should m be inserted, and occlude it with a 
straight hemostat;
• Connect the drain to the system (Figure 5);
• Position the patient in the usual way, in the 
supine position, headboard at 30º and the ipsilateral arm 
elevated;
• Perform wide antisepsis with degerming and 
alcoholic chlorhexidine;
• Place the sterile drapes;
• Carry out the local anesthesia;
• Proceed with incision in the 5th intercostal 
space in the posterior axillary line;
3
Carvalho
Safety model for chest drainage in pandemic by COVID-19
Rev Col Bras Cir 47:e20202568
Figure 1. Common thoracic drain collector with two open air holes.
Figure 3. Tube connector coupled to the collector and the hole 
communicating with the closed environment.
Figure 4. The collector with the HEPA filter connected to the connector 
of the orotracheal tube which was previously coupled and the other 
closed hole to avoid aerosols.
Figure 2. Orotracheal tube to be used as a collector.
4
Carvalho
Safety model for chest drainage in pandemic by COVID-19
Rev Col Bras Cir 47:e20202568
Figure 5. Closed draining system which is ready for the procedure, 
complying with safety recommendations.
• Dissect by planes, until the pleural cavity. 
If the patient is on mechanical ventilation, interrupt 
ventilation at that time;
• Insert the occluded drain, and with the 
intermediate connector attached to the collection 
bottle, fix it with 1 Vicryl® suture. Perform suture to the 
skin to obtain hermetic closure of the orifice;
• Unclamp the hemostat;
• Apply a U stich with 2.0 Nylon® suture and 
cover with the dressing.
	
CONCLUSIONS
Aerosolization by chest tube insertion is still 
an unknown phenomenon, but we should consider 
avoiding any possible means of contamination. The 
use of the entire closed circuit, occluded by a clamp 
and already connected to the collection bottle, is part 
of the arsenal for the safety of the care team.
We should consider as limiting the work 
the fact that the HEPA filter intercepts particles as 
small as 0.3 μm. A droplet is 0.5 µm. However, the 
size of the virus varies between 0.07 and 0.09 µm9. 
Considering that the microorganism needs a vehicle 
to be carried to the environment and that it would 
be aerosolization, the HEPA filter would be effective. 
However, the effectiveness of this adaptation needs 
to be studied, and the benefits, proven through 
evidence-based medicine. However, given the current 
pandemic, any method of reducing viral spread should 
be considered.
	
REFERENCES
1.	
Johns Hopkins University & Medicine [Internet]. 
COVID-19 Map [cited 2020 Apr 11]. Available from: 
https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html. 
2.	
Chen W, Huang Y. To protect healthcare workers 
better, to save more lives. Anesth Analg. 2020. 
doi:10.1213/ANE.0000000000004834.
3.	
Li R, Pei S, Chen B, Song Y, Zhang T, Yang W, et 
al. Substantial undocumented infection facilitates 
the rapid dissemination of novel coronavirus (SARS-
CoV2). Science. 2020;pii: eabb3221. doi: 10.1126/
science.abb3221.
4.	
Van Doremalen N, Bushmaker T, Morris DH, 
Holbrook MG, Gamble A, Williamson BN, et al. 
Aerosol and surface stability of SARS-CoV-2 as 
compared with SARS-CoV-1. N Engl J Med. 2020; 
382(16):1564-7. doi:10.1056/NEJMc2004973
Mais de um milhão de casos do vírus SARS-CoV-2 foram confirmados em todo o mundo, com o número de mortos ultrapassando 
50.000 pessoas. Uma questão importante a ser abordada diz respeito à exposição dos profissionais de saúde à esse novo vírus. Os pri-
meiros relatórios da província de Wuhan, na China, descreveram taxas de infecção de até 29% entre os profissionais de saúde antes que 
o uso de equipamentos de proteção pessoal (EPI) fosse totalmente regulamentado. Existem vários protocolos sobre o uso correto de EPI 
durante os procedimentos geradores de aerossóis. No entanto, não há orientação específica sobre como proceder em casos
de necessidade de drenos torácicos em pacientes com vazamento de ar ativo COVID-19 positivos. O objetivo desse trabalho é auxiliar 
os cirurgiões das mais diversas especialidades durante a drenagem torácica de um paciente com COVID-19 e evitar um risco de conta-
minação ao profissional e no ambiente.
Palavras chave: Síndrome Respiratória Aguda Grave. Toracostomia. Cirurgia Torácica. Coronavirus.
R E S U M O
5
Carvalho
Safety model for chest drainage in pandemic by COVID-19
Rev Col Bras Cir 47:e20202568
5.	
Bilkhu R, Viviano A, Saftic I, Billè A. COVID-19: 
Chest Drains With Air Leak - The Silent ‘Super 
Spreader’ [Internet]? CTSNET; 2020 [cited 2020 Apr 
11]. Available from: https://www.ctsnet.org/article/
covid-19-chest-drains-air-leak-%E2%80%93-
silent-%E2%80%98super-spreader%E2%80%99.
6.	
Cohen B. The history of HEPA filters [Internet]. 
Berktree; 2020 [cited 2020 Apr 13]. Available from: 
http://www.berktree.com/article-The-History-of-
HEPA-Filters.html. 
7.	
Pearce 
RJ. 
Fire 
protection 
technology 
for 
semiconductor 
operations. 
In. 
Bolmen 
RA. 
Semiconductor safety handbook:  safety and health 
in the semiconductor industry.  Westwood NJ: 
Noyes Publication; 1998.
8.	
ScienceDirect [Internet]. High Efficiency Particulate 
Air Filter. [cited 2020 Apr 13]. Available from:  
https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/engineering/
high-efficiency-particulate-air-filter. 
9.	
Kim JM, Chung YS, Jo HJ, Lee NJ, Kim MS, Woo 
SH, et al. Identification of coronavirus isolated 
from a patient in Korea with COVID-19. Osong 
Public Health Res Perspect. 2020;11(1):3-7. doi: 
10.24171/j.phrp.2020.11.1.02.
Received in: 11/04/2020
Accepted for publication: 14/04/2020
Conflict of interest: no.
Funding source: none.
Mailing address:
Erlon de Avila Carvalho
E-mail: erlon.avila@gmail.com/erlon_avila@hotmail.com
Marina Varela Braga de Oliveira 
E-mail: marina_varella@hotmail.com
