 
The pandemic in prison: interventions and overisolation 
A pandemia no cárcere: intervenções e superisolamento 
Sérgio Garófalo de Carvalho 
Universidade Federal da Bahia 
sergiogarofalo@hotmail.com 
ORCID: 0000-0001-5936-9601 
 
Andreia Beatriz Silva dos Santos 
Universidade Estadual de Feira de Santana 
Médica do Sistema Penitenciário da Bahia 
andreiasantos72@hotmail.com 
ORCID: 0000-0003-3755-021X 
 
Ivete Maria Santos 
Universidade Federal da Bahia 
Médica do Sistema Penitenciário da Bahia 
ivetesantos66@yahoo.com.br 
ORCID:  0000-0001-8630-0503 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
Prisional health is, in its essence, public health. The COVID-19 pandemic poses a great threat 
to the world and has shown that preventing the disease escalation in prisons integrates the novel 
corona virus clash in society in general. Up to this moment, the most effective known measure 
to curb the disease spread is social isolation. Nevertheless, in penal institutions, often 
overcrowded, social isolation becomes difficult to carry out and, when it happens, it takes the 
enclosed population to overisolation, with consequences to their mental health. Besides, 
prisoners suffer with clogged up environment, lack of materials for personal hygiene, poor basic 
sanitary conditions and difficulties in accessing health services. In order to reduce the disease 
spread, several countries are taking measures such as definite or temporary release of prisoners 
and visiting restrictions. This paper deals with a narrative review on the pandemic effects in 
prisons and how government and civil society have organized themselves in order to reduce the 
disease consequences at those places. The text has been divided into three sections: the first 
with literature review on the current health theme; the second discusses how different countries 
have been dealing with the prison situation in the pandemic context, and, the last part focuses 
on how the Brazilian Penal System has reacted to the new disease. 
 
Key words: Prisons; Prisoners; SARS-CoV-2; COVID-19 pandemic. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Resumo 
Saúde prisional é, em sua essência, saúde pública. A pandemia de COVID-19 representa uma 
grande ameaça para o mundo e tem demonstrado que prevenir a escalada da doença em prisões 
faz parte do combate ao novo coronavírus na sociedade em geral. Sabe-se, até o momento, que 
a mais efetiva medida de contenção ao avanço da doença é o isolamento social. No entanto, em 
instituições penais, muitas vezes superlotadas, tal medida torna-se de difícil implementação e, 
quando acontece, leva a população privada de liberdade a um superisolamento, tendo 
consequências em sua saúde mental. Além disso, indivíduos presos sofrem com ambientes sem 
ventilação, falta de materiais de higiene pessoal, condições sanitárias básicas precárias e 
dificuldade de acesso a serviços de saúde. Para reduzir a propagação da doença, medidas estão 
sendo tomadas em vários países, como a libertação temporária ou definitiva de presos e a 
restrição de visitas. O presente artigo objetiva ser uma revisão narrativa sobre os efeitos da 
pandemia em presídios e como governos e sociedade civil têm se organizado a fim de reduzir 
as consequências sobre esses locais. A publicação foi dividida em três seções: na primeira, há 
uma revisão da literatura em saúde sobre a temática; na segunda, é tratado o modo como 
diferentes países estão lidando com a situação carcerária no contexto da pandemia; na terceira 
e última parte, é abordado o modo como o Sistema Penal brasileiro tem reagido à nova doença.  
 
Palavras-chave: Prisões; Preisioneiros; SARS-CoV-2; Pandemia por COVID-19. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
The outbreak of the disease (COVID-19) caused by the novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) in 
China gained global prominence and was declared a pandemic by the World Health 
Organization (WHO) on March 11, 2020. As there are no specific treatments and vaccines 
available to control the disease, the COVID-19 pandemic represents a major threat to public 
health worldwide, requiring prevention actions, such as social isolation and strengthening 
hygiene measures1. 
The potential for transmission of the virus is already known when indoors and with 
agglomerations. Mizumoto and Chowell2 described the epidemiological evolution within an 
Asian cruise, in which the average number of reproduction in the confined environment reached 
values close to 11, which is higher than the estimates reported in the dynamics of community 
transmission in China and Singapore, ranging from 1.1 to 7. On this ship, cases went from 1 to 
454 in just 16 days. The Spanish flu affected about a quarter of all prisoners, a much higher 
prevalence compared to data from the general population3. 
Criminal institutions confer a confinement imposed by a judicial authority and are surrounded 
by stigma and vulnerability4. Confinement within a prison unit is distinct from other types, such 
as cruises, schools, quarantine, which are voluntary isolations, while in prison freedom is 
unwittingly curtailed. In this sense, when applied to the prison context, the isolation measure 
results in a superposition of confinements, which we call overisolation. 
Many prisons in Brazil and in the world are overcrowded, offering little space in relation to 
what is recommended for adequate distancing. Of the countries, 59% have prison occupancy 
rates that exceed the reported capacity5. With this, the possibility is high that the corona virus 
 
is rapidly transmitted within the criminal institutions. In a single day in February, China 
recorded 200 contaminated in one of its prisons, when the curve of infections was already 
falling in the country6. 
In addition to being a great risk for people deprived of liberty, a high prevalence of viral 
respiratory infections in prison populations can serve as a potential source of infection for the 
general population. This is because prisons are porous institutions, such as the borders of 
countries in the globalized world7. Through prison officers, workers, visitors, prisoners released 
and transferred, corona virus can pass through the bars of the prison system and be transmitted 
to local communities8. 
By definition, prison health is public health and should be treated as such by governments and 
the scientific community. Thus, this article is a narrative review on the SARS-CoV-2 and the 
prison population, in order to gather what has been published on the subject in health journals 
and elucidate the theme, with the aim of reinforcing the need to guarantee fundamental human 
rights to people deprived of liberty and safeguarding the health of the population in general. 
For better reading and understanding of the subject, this publication is divided into the 
following topics: the state of the art on COVID-19 and the prison population; covid-19 
prevention measures in prisons worldwide; coping with the novel coronavirus in the Brazilian 
prison system and final considerations. 
 
 
 
 
 
THE STATE OF ART ABOUT COVID-19 AND PRISON POPULATION 
 
To carry out this narrative review, articles published until April 25, 2020 in health journals were 
researched. Texts in English, Spanish and Portuguese and in any formats, such as editorials, 
comments, correspondence, opinions, empirical studies and others were included. 
The search took place in two databases, PubMed and Google Scholar, the search strategy is in 
Table 1. A total of 605 results were found and, after reading the title and/or abstract, 13 articles 
remained for complete reading. No formal quality assessment was performed, but the important 
methodological characteristics were considered when interpreting the results presented here 
narratively. 
In PubMed, 3,710 articles were found in the search for the descriptor "COVID-19", but only 
six publications (0.16%) addressing the pandemic in the prison context. Of the 13 articles 
included in this review, only one is an original study. In Table 2, you can see the description of 
these works. 
Social distancing is practically impossible in correctional facilities, where individuals live in 
confinement in overcrowded and poorly ventilated environments, share bathrooms and 
showers, as well as common areas such as cafeterias, patios and classrooms10. Hand hygiene is 
hampered by policies that limit access to soap, and many prisons restrict alcohol intake, fearing 
that people have ingested it14. 
Populations deprived of liberty have an increased prevalence of infectious diseases, such as 
HIV infections and hepatitis C virus (HCV)7. Inequities in social determinants of health that 
affect groups that are disproportionately liable to incarceration - racial and sexual minorities, 
people with mental disorders or psychoactive substance use, individuals without access to the 
 
health system or education - lead to higher concentrations of some diseases in incarcerated 
populations7. The risk for a person deprived of liberty to develop tuberculosis in Brazil is 30 
times higher than the general Brazilian population21. Infectious diseases account for about 
17.5% of deaths in prisons11. 
In addition to the difficulties related to the physical and social structures mentioned above, there 
are administrative challenges - largely caused by the lack or mismanagement of financial 
resources14, which may hinder the access of possible prisoners with COVID-19 to adequate 
health care in case of need for advanced support. The rights of all affected persons must be 
respected and all public health measures should be implemented without discrimination of any 
kind18. 
All the revised publications highlight the urgent need to take measures to prevent SARS-CoV-
2 in prison environments, it is necessary to consider chains as reservoirs that can lead to the 
resurgence of the epidemic, if it is not adequately treated in these facilities7. Therefore, three 
premises must be fulfilled: the entry of the virus into penitentiaries should be postponed as 
much as possible; if it is already in circulation, it must be checked and, finally, prisons must 
prepare to deal with those who develop COVID-197. 
Given the epidemiological dynamics of COVID-19, in the absence of any intervention, among 
inmates, the outbreak is considerably more severe than in the general population, requiring 
more hospitalization and leading to more deaths. The peak of the epidemic within a penal 
institution, according to mathematical modeling20, is considerably earlier, occurring 63 days 
earlier than the peak of infections in the community. The same study20 showed that postponing 
the arrest of 90% of individuals from groups at risk to COVID-19 would reduce the mortality 
of the disease in prisons by 56.1%. Although only 1.5% of the prison population is elderly in 
 
Brazil22, incarceration itself degrades people's health, leaving them more vulnerable to infection 
and severe infection results. 
There is consensus that an effective action to mitigate the evolution of the pandemic in 
correctional environments is the release, temporary or definitive, of prisoners. For example, 
Iran has released 70,000 individuals so far incarcerated7. Two articles10,13 that discuss the 
current situation of immigrants imprisoned in the United States advocate releasing all 
individuals who do not pose a threat to local security, and to momentarily cease the policy of 
incarceration against illegal immigration adopted in recent years. Yang and Thompson11 
suggest that sentences for people tried with misdemeanors are alternatives to deprivation of 
liberty. 
The WHO18 recommends that individuals who make up the risk group for COVID-19 leave 
prisons if they do not pose a danger to society. An important argument for this measure is raised 
by the assumption20 that the interruption of the arrest of individuals for minor crimes, with the 
overall reduction of arrests by approximately 83%, would result in 71.8% fewer infections in 
the incarcerated population. This strategy20 would also lead to 2.4% fewer infections among 
employees and 12.1% in the community in general. 
Public policies to mitigate inequality must follow the judicial decisions of release of these 
people, since many graduates of the prison system do not have family and social support. This 
can lead to the desired opposite effect with the release of these individuals and they become 
carriers and transmitters of SARS-CoV-2 while searching for income, housing, or even, to 
compose the population in street situation16. Stephenson15 recalls that in California and New 
York, the government is renting hotel rooms to some of those prisoners released. Thus, freeing 
imprisoned individuals should be an intersectoral action, involving public power, social 
assistance, NGOs, health services and the judiciary. 
 
If, however, the only measure is to reduce the size of the prison population, there will be a 
neglect of countless other things that must be done17. Mitigation strategies in detention centers 
should be complemented by routine screening and containment procedures. This involves 
screening all people entering the facility, including new inmates, employees, visitors and 
suppliers, quarantined those who are positive for exposure to the novel coronavirus10. 
Other measures are suggested in the revised bibliography. Yang and Thompson11 suggest 
intensifying health education for inmates and prison workers. Everyone should receive training 
on how to identify signs of COVID-19 and ways to prevent the disease. Suspension of visits 
from family and lawyers and reduction of transfers are proposed by Akiyama, Spaulding and 
Rich7, also suggesting that teleconference be applied in these cases in order to reduce emotional 
isolation. Cleaning and disinfection of the environments, as well as purchase of toiletries and 
masks must be carried out by the government12,14. 
In the revised publications, it was also said that the measures should take and account that the 
psychological reactions of people deprived of liberty may differ from those observed in people 
who observe social distancing in the community, since, in prison, there will be a overisolation. 
The unintended consequences of these mitigation policies should be considered. 
The recent rebellions in Italian prisons have revealed the potential for negative psychological 
impact of emergency policies aimed at reducing the spread of SARS-CoV-2 in criminal 
institutions14. Therefore, the growing need for emotional and psychological support, transparent 
awareness and sharing of information about the disease and the guarantee that continuous 
contact with family will be maintained18, so that people deprived of liberty can collaborate in 
pandemic mitigation strategies. 
 
 
COVID-19 IN PRISONS IN THE WORLD 
 
This review aims to show that, despite what has been done by people deprived of liberty in the 
current pandemic, it is still insufficient and marginalizing. In 2018, there were more than 10 
million people deprived of liberty worldwide23, largely in poor sanitary conditions, with little 
access to health services and in overcrowded institutions. The prison population of several 
countries, as well as graduates of the penal system, suffers from stigma4, abandonment of public 
power and what the philosopher Mbembe calls necropolitics24, based on a State of Exception, 
in which it has the power to dictate who should live and who should die, desizing from the 
subject his political status and, if not actively taking his life, exposing him to death. 
For information on how different countries are dealing with the pandemic in the prison context, 
information contained in the Prison Insider initiative25, created by the founder of the 
International Observatory of Prisons, has been reviewed and summarized. The site gathers up-
to-date information on various aspects of prisons in the world and currently has an area focused 
on the novel coronavirus. It should be noted, however, that there is a limitation of this 
information, since not all countries or organizations make the data available and, when they do, 
it is not in real time. 
As of May 5, 2020, there were 145 countries with data presented and a total of 23,019 records 
of SARS-CoV-2 infections, with the United States being the first, with more than 17,000 people 
deprived of their freedom infected25. On the other hand, there are complaints in several 
countries of lack of transparency in data26,27. The supervision by activists, international 
organizations and parliamentarians has been compromised27-28 under the pretext of reducing 
access to prisons due to COVID-19. Concern stemmed from concern that in Syria the regime 
 
may be using the pandemic to get rid of prisoners, hardening repression against them29, and 
similarly, Palestinian prisoners have been more exposed to the new virus in Israeli prisons30. 
Figure 1 shows the measures practiced by several countries, summarized through our review of 
the Prison Insider initiative24. 
Something that could be effective was reported only 5 of the 145 countries reviewed25: mass 
testing of trapped individuals. The two most practiced measures are the suspension or reduction 
of visits and the release of prisoners. It should be noted, however, that even though there are 
large numbers of prisoners being released, the institutions still fall short of holding so many 
people. 
There are reports that the excess of prisoners, coupled with the fear of falling ill and the 
suspension of visits in various locations has caused rebellions in various penal institutions 
around the world. To exemplify: in Luxembourg, there were reports of a hunger strike31. In 
Italy, rebellions have been reported in several areas of the country32. In Argentina, there have 
been at least one death and several injured as a result of riots33. 
The effervescence that occurred in prisons may be associated with the little health quality 
information passed on to inmates. Few countries reported having invested in health education, 
given the context of the pandemic. WHO18 stresses the importance of providing adequate 
information and legal guarantees to people deprived of liberty in order to reassure them and 
their families. 
If, on the one hand, prisoners must be protected by efficient public health policies, on the other, 
they actively participate in the fight against SARS-CoV-2. Several countries have reported that 
the prison population is voluntarily working on the making of masks to be distributed in health 
services and in the community. In Guatemala, a young prisoner reported to the report while 
 
wearing masks: "If I was able to harm Guatemala in the past, today I want to make up for my 
mistakes." 34. 
 
COPING WITH CORONAVIRUS IN THE BRAZILIAN PRISON SYSTEM 
 
In Brazil, the health needs of people deprived of liberty are under the responsibility of the State, 
as provided for by the Criminal Execution Law – LEP35, but policies have also been 
implemented for the inclusion of the prison population within the SUS. In 2014, the National 
Policy for Integral Health Care of the Private Person of Liberty 36 (PNAISP) was instituted, 
whose objective is focused on ensuring the care of people deprived of liberty at all levels of 
complexity, expanding and organizing from the forms of financing of prison health teams to 
the main health actions for people arrested. 
A challenge for prison systems around the world, COVID-19, whose most effective treatment 
is in the prevention of their transmission, individual hygiene and collective spaces, ventilated 
environments and social isolation1, exposes the precariousness of prisons in Brazil. This 
challenges managers to ensure the effectiveness of the actions foreseen in the PNAISP, as well 
as for health professionals who are on the front line in prisons to organize themselves in the 
face of the risks of an explosion of cases and deaths. 
In 2019, there were 1,422 prisons in Brazil, of which 49% are destined for the detention of 
provisional prisoners and 79% are overcrowded22. Half of the prison institutions do not have a 
doctor's office. According to the National Penitentiary Department22, in the same year, there 
were 755,274 people deprived of liberty in the country, of which 31% are provisional prisoners. 
 
Brazil complied with the measures proposed by WHO18 in relation to the population deprived 
of liberty through Recommendation 62/2020 of the National Council of Justice (CNJ)37. This 
involves incarceration and non-imprisonment measures, in addition to other sanitary actions, 
detailed in Table 3. Recommendation 62/202037 considers as belonging to the risk group: 
elderly; pregnant women; people with chronic, respiratory or immunosuppressive conditions. 
In addition to the above recommendations, the Brazilian Society of Family and Community 
Medicine issued a document stressing the need for other measures: educational actions, 
combating fake news, individual and collective hygiene, hygiene of environments, providing 
information to family members and hygiene of hygiene material of safety professionals, 
involving actions for prisoners and various prison professionals38. 
As of May 11, 2020, there were 603 cases of COVID-19 confirmed in Brazilian prisons, 
resulting in 23 deaths22. With only 20 days, the numbers jumped from 1 to more than 100 in 
Brazil39. Despite the recommendations and efforts of civil society, much remains to be done. A 
religious entity working in prisons disclosed the data that 65.9% of food and hygiene materials 
sent by family members were not entering prisons40. The same religious organization cites the 
lack of transparency and PPE, in addition to poor hygiene conditions, such as the report that 35 
prisoners would be using the same toothbrush41. 
It is noteworthy that of the 603 cases of COVID-19 in Brazilian prisons, 444 (74%) are in the 
Penitentiary Complex of Papuda42, in the Federal District, an institution that houses many 
imprisoned politicians and criminals with greater purchasing power. The data may evidence an 
inequality in the Penitentiary System that reproduces that of society in general, in which there 
is more access to tests for the novel coronavirus when it occupies a position of social or financial 
privilege. 
 
 
Final considerations 
 
The PNAISP and the recommendations of the CNJ, adapted to the reality of each place are 
significant initiatives in the health care of people deprived of liberty and give visibility to this 
problem sensitive and relevant to public health, considering that, because they are porous 
institutions, the injuries that affect prisons are not restricted to it. 
Coping with COVID-19 in Brazilian prison institutions, as in much of the world, is a challenge, 
in view of the precariousness that characterizes them, the result of chronic disregard of public 
authorities and civil society, which give prisoners an illegitimate worsening of the formal 
sentence, such as the denial of basic sanitary conditions, such as access to drinking water. 
In this sense, in times of pandemic, the prison scenario is aggravated by the overlapping of 
problems, pre-existing and new, that require more aggressive sanitary measures, such as the 
suspension of visits and others, which result in overisolation, which, in addition, can affect the 
mental health of people deprived of liberty. 
Pandemic containment measures taken around the world reveal that there is a consensus on 
releasing prisoners and suspending visits, but other actions are put aside, such as health 
education and mass testing in the prison population, which could help in epidemiological 
projections, given that they are closed and controlled groups. Another consensus is that the lack 
of health data available on this population prevents the adoption of more effective measures. 
Scientific publications related to COVID-19, as well as other infectious diseases, in the prison 
population are scarce, pointing to a possible lack of interest in this theme by the scientific 
community, which may result from the stigma and difficulty of access to this group. 
 
Given the above, the pandemic for the novel corona virus has been playing a revealing role in 
the unhealthy and inhuman conditions aimed at the recovery of human beings. May the public 
authorities, civil society and the scientific community take something positive from the current 
public health crisis in order to change the fate of vulnerable populations! 
 
Acknowledgment 
 
Thanks to Professor Hélio Marques da Silva, for translating the article, and to Richard Luiz 
Eduardo and Antônio Teixeira, for their contributions. 
 
References 
 
1- Jin Y, Yang H, Ji W, Wu W, Chen S, Zhang W, Duan G. Virology, Epidemiology, 
Pathogenesis, and Control of COVID-19. Viruses. 2020 Mar 27;12(4):E372. 
 
2- Mizumoto K, Chowell G. Transmission potential of the novel coronavirus (COVID-
19) onboard the diamond Princess Cruises Ship, 2020. Infect Dis Model. 2020 Feb 
29;5:264-270. 
 
3- Finnie TJ, Copley VR, Hall IM, Leach S. An analysis of influenza outbreaks in 
institutions and enclosed societies. Epidemiol Infect. 2014 Jan;142(1):107-13. 
 
 
4- Goffman E. Estigma: notas sobre a manipulação da identidade deteriorada. Rio de 
Janeiro: Zahar; 1982. 
 
5- World prison brief online database [Internet]. 2020. Occupancy level (based on 
official capacity); [cited 2020 Apr 30]; Available from: 
https://www.prisonstudies.org/highest-to-lowest/occupancy-
level?field_region_taxonomy_tid=All 
 
6- NPR [Internet]. 2020 Feb 21. Coronavirus Found In China Prisons, As Cases Spike In 
South Korea; [cited 2020 Apr 30]; Available from: 
https://www.npr.org/2020/02/21/808002924/coronavirus-found-in-china-prisons-as-
cases-spike-in-south-korea 
 
7- Akiyama MJ, Spaulding AC, Rich JD. Flattening the Curve for Incarcerated 
Populations - Covid-19 in Jails and Prisons. N Engl J Med. 2020 Apr 2.  
 
8- Sylverken A, El-Duah P, Owusu M, Yeboah R, Kwarteng A, Ofori L, Gorman R, 
Obiri-Danso K, Owusu-Dabo E. Burden of respiratory viral infections among inmates 
of a Ghanaian prison. 
 
9- Simpson PL, Butler TG. Covid-19, prison crowding, and release policies. BMJ. 2020 
Apr 20;369:m1551. 
 
 
 
10- Meyer JP, Franco-Paredes C, Parmar P, Yasin F, Gartland M. COVID-19 and the 
coming epidemic in US immigration detention centres. Lancet Infect Dis. 2020 Apr 
15:S1473-3099(20)30295-4. 
 
11- Yang H, Thompson JR. Fighting covid-19 outbreaks in prisons. BMJ. 2020 Apr 
2;369:m1362. 
 
12- Kinner SA, Young JT, Snow K, Southalan L, Lopez-Acuña D, Ferreira-Borges C, 
O'Moore É. Prisons and custodial settings are part of a comprehensive response to 
COVID-19. Lancet Public Health. 2020 Apr;5(4):e188-e189. 
 
13- Keller AS, Wagner BD. COVID-19 and immigration detention in the USA: time to 
act. Lancet Public Health. 2020 May;5(5):e245-e246. 
 
14- Wurcel AG, Dauria E, Zaller N, Nijhawan A, Beckwith C, Nowotny K, Brinkley-
Rubinstein L. Spotlight on Jails: COVID-19 Mitigation Policies Needed Now. Clin 
Infect Dis. 2020 Mar 28:ciaa346. 
 
15- Stephenson J. COVID-19 Pandemic Poses Challenge for Jails and Prisons. InJAMA 
Health Forum 2020 Apr 1 (Vol. 1, No. 4, pp. e200422-e200422). American Medical 
Association. 
 
16- Gorman G, Ramaswamy M. Detained during a pandemic: A postcard from the 
Midwest. Public Health Nurs. 2020 May;37(3):325-326. 
 
 
17- Rubin R. The challenge of preventing COVID-19 spread in correctional facilities. 
JAMA. 2020 Apr 7. 
 
18- World Health Organization. Preparedness, prevention and control of COVID-19 in 
prisons and other places of detention (2020), Interim guidance 15 March 2020. 
 
19- Liebrenz M, Bhugra D, Buadze A, Schleifer R. Caring for persons in detention 
suffering with mental illness during the Covid-19 outbreak. Forensic science 
international. Mind and law. 2020;1. 
 
20- Lofgren E, Lum K, Horowitz A, Madubuowu B, Fefferman N. The Epidemiological 
Implications of Incarceration Dynamics in Jails for Community, Corrections Officer, 
and Incarcerated Population Risks from COVID-19. medRxiv. 2020 Jan 1. 
 
21- Mabud TS, Alves MD, Ko AI, Basu S, Walter KS, Cohen T, Mathema B, Colijn C, 
Lemos E, Croda J, Andrews JR. Evaluating strategies for control of tuberculosis in 
prisons and prevention of spillover into communities: An observational and modeling 
study from Brazil. PLoS medicine. 2019 Jan;16(1). 
 
22- DEPEN [Internet]. 2017 Jun 30. INFOPEN; [cited 2020 May 11]; Available from: 
http://depen.gov.br/DEPEN/depen/sisdepen/infopen 
 
23- Walmsley R. International World Prison Population List. Institute for Criminal Policy 
Research (ICPR). 2018. 
 
 
24- Mbembe A. Necropolitics. Duke University Press; 2019 Oct 25. 
 
25- Prison Insider [Internet]. [place unknown]; 2020 May 05. Coronavirus : la fièvre des 
prisons; [cited 2020 May 5]; Available from: https://www.prison-
insider.com/articles/coronavirus-la-fievre-des-prisons 
 
26- The Marshall Project [Internet]. [place unknown]; 2020 Mar 17. As COVID-19 
Measures Grow, Prison Oversight Falls; [cited 2020 May 1]; Available from: 
https://www.themarshallproject.org/2020/03/17/as-covid-19-measures-grow-prison-
oversight-falls. 
 
27- Sobesednik [Internet]. [place unknown]; 2020 Mar 31. Vladimir Osechkin: I'm afraid 
that prison statistics on COVID-19 are falsified; [cited 2020 May 1]; Available from: 
https://sobesednik.ru/obshchestvo/20200331-vladimir-osechkin-boyus-chto-
t?fbclid=IwAR3Bi0kBBpFujMihl1XnyFFXqsuD9rXBg5iH_1ppwE3Ry8bjmLBZUL
CENYwvid-19-measures-grow-prison-oversight-falls. 
 
28- France 3 [Internet]. [place unknown]; 2020 Apr 16. Coronavirus : le député LFI Ugo 
Bernalicis conteste son interdiction de visiter la prison de Sequedin; [cited 2020 May 
1]; Available from: https://france3-regions.francetvinfo.fr/hauts-de-
france/coronavirus-depute-lfi-ugo-bernalicis-conteste-son-interdiction-visiter-prison-
sequedin-1817236.html. 
 
29- Syria Direct [Internet]. [place unknown]; 2020 Apr 14. Coronavirus: The Syrian 
regime’s novel weapon against detainees; [cited 2020 May 4]; Available from: 
 
https://syriadirect.org/news/coronavirus-the-syrian-regime%E2%80%99s-novel-
weapon-against-detainees/. 
 
30- Middle East Monitor [Internet]. [place unknown]; 2020 Apr 14. Israel’s jail conditions 
will kill Palestinian prisoners before coronavirus does; [cited 2020 May 4]; Available 
from: https://www.middleeastmonitor.com/20200414-israels-jail-conditions-will-kill-
palestinian-prisoners-before-coronavirus-does/#comment-4876974513. 
 
31- RTL [Internet]. [place unknown]; 2020 Mar 31. 30 inmates embark on hunger strike 
following protests; [cited 2020 May 2]; Available from: 
https://today.rtl.lu/news/luxembourg/a/1493481.html. 
 
32- Prison Insider [Internet]. [place unknown]; 2020 Mar 12. Italie : révoltes dues au 
coronavirus, douze prisonniers décédés; [cited 2020 May 2]; Available from: 
https://www.prison-insider.com/articles/italie-revoltes-dues-au-coronavirus-douze-
prisonniers-decedes?referrer=%2Fpreview.php%2Farticles%2Fcoronavirus-la-fievre-
des-prisons. 
 
33- Clarín [Internet]. [place unknown]; 2020 Mar 23. Un muerto en un motín en dos 
cárceles de Santa Fe: reclaman medidas de seguridad por el coronavirus; [cited 2020 
May 7]; Available from: https://www.clarin.com/policiales/graves-disturbios-carceles-
santa-fe-reclaman-medidas-seguridad-coronavirus_0_z6ZWKbGfp.html. 
 
34- CNN [Internet]. [place unknown]; 2020 Mar 27. Coronavirus en Guatemala: Jóvenes 
fabrican al menos 5.000 mascarillas desde la prisión; [cited 2020 May 6]; Available 
 
from: https://cnnespanol.cnn.com/video/coronavirus-mascarillas-jovenes-prision-
ciudad-guatemala-pandemia-pkg-digital-orig-michelle-mendoza/. 
 
35- BRASIL. LEI Nº 7.210, de 11 de julho de 1984. Institui a Lei de Execução penal. 
2010. 
 
36- BRASIL. Portaria Interministerial n. 1, de 02 de janeiro de 2014. Institui a Política 
Nacional de Atenção Integral à Saúde das Pessoas Privadas de Liberdade no Sistema 
Prisional (PNAISP) no âmbito do Sistema Único de Saúde (SUS). Diário Oficial da 
União. 2014. 
 
37- Conselho Nacional de Justiça. Recomendação nº 62, de 17 de março de 2020. 
Recomenda aos Tribunais e magistrados a adoção de medidas preventivas à 
propagação da infecção pelo novo coronavírus - Covid-19 no âmbito dos sistemas de 
justiça penal e socioeducativo. https://www.cnj.jus.br/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/62-
Recomendação.pdf (acessado em 14/Abr/2020). 
 
38- SBMFC [Internet]. 2020 Mar 25. Medidas e orientações para o enfrentamento da 
COVID-19 nas prisões; [cited 2020 Apr 29]; Available from: 
https://www.sbmfc.org.br/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/Medidas-e-
orientac%CC%A7o%CC%83es-para-o-enfrentamento-a-COVID-%E2%80%93-19-
nas-priso%CC%83es.pdf. 
 
 
39- Ponte [Internet]. 2020 Apr 28. Casos de coronavírus em prisões vão de 1 a 107 em 20 
dias, com 7 mortes; [cited 2020 Apr 8]; Available from: https://ponte.org/casos-de-
covid-19-em-prisoes-vao-de-1-a-107-em-20-dias-com-7-mortes/. 
 
40- Pastoral Carcerária [Internet]. 2020 Apr 09. Pastoral Carcerária divulga dados de 
questionário sobre coronavírus nas prisões; [cited 2020 May 6]; Available from: 
https://carceraria.org.br/combate-e-prevencao-a-tortura/pastoral-carceraria-divulga-
dados-de-questionario-sobre-coronavirus-nas-prisoes. 
 
41- Pastoral Carcerária [Internet]. 2020 Apr 22. Pastoral Carcerária divulga relatos e 
denúncias sobre o sistema carcerário em tempos de pandemia; [cited 2020 May 6]; 
Available from: https://carceraria.org.br/combate-e-prevencao-a-tortura/pastoral-
carceraria-divulga-relatos-e-denuncias-sobre-o-sistema-carcerario-em-tempos-de-
pandemia. 
 
42- Correio Braziliense [Internet]. 2020 May 11. Número de presos infectados pelo 
coronavírus na Papuda chega a 444; [cited 2020 May 14]; Available from: 
https://www.correiobraziliense.com.br/app/noticia/cidades/2020/05/11/interna_cidade
sdf,853723/numero-de-presos-infectados-pelo-coronavirus-na-papuda-chega-a-
444.shtml. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Author´s contributions 
SG Carvalho, ABS Santos and IM Santos participated in conception, literature and data 
review, writing, critical reviewings and final approval of the manuscript. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 1: Database search strategy 
PubMed 
Google Scholar 
(((((((((((((((((((((prison[Title/Abstract]) OR (prisons[Title/Abstract])) 
OR (jail[Title/Abstract])) OR (emprisionment[Title/Abstract])) OR 
(in jail[Title/Abstract])) OR (arrest[Title/Abstract])) OR 
(arrested[Title/Abstract])) OR (detention[Title/Abstract])) OR 
(custody[Title/Abstract])) OR (confinement[Title/Abstract])) OR 
(cage[Title/Abstract])) OR (in cage[Title/Abstract])) OR 
(quod[Title/Abstract])) OR (chokey[Title/Abstract])) OR 
(choky[Title/Abstract])) OR (gaol[Title/Abstract])) OR 
(entanglement[Title/Abstract])) OR (accouchement[Title/Abstract])) 
OR (constrain[Title/Abstract])) OR (ewer[Title/Abstract])) OR 
(captivity[Title/Abstract])) AND (((((coronavirus[Title/Abstract]) OR 
(SARS-COV-2[Title/Abstract])) OR (coronaviruses[Title/Abstract])) 
OR (covid-19[Title/Abstract])) OR (pandemy[Title/Abstract])) 
 
Coronavirus AND prisons  
 
 
 
COVID-19 AND prisons 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2: Publications included in the review  
Title 
Authors 
Publication type 
Journal 
Covid-19, prison crowding, and 
release policies9 
Simpson PL, Butler TG. 
Editorial 
BMJ 
COVID-19 and the coming epidemic 
in US immigration detention 
centres10 
Meyer JP, Franco-Paredes C, 
Parmar P, Yasin F, Gartland 
M. 
Comment 
Lancet Infect Dis  
Fighting covid-19 outbreaks in 
prisons11 
Yang H, Thompson JR. 
Letter 
BMJ  
Flattening the Curve for Incarcerated 
Populations — Covid-19 in Jails and 
Prisons7 
Akiyama MJ, Spaulding AC, 
Rich JD.  
 
Perspective 
 N Engl J Med. 
Prisons and custodial settings are part 
of a comprehensive response to 
COVID-1912 
Kinner SA, Young JT, Snow 
K, et al. 
Comment 
Lancet Public Health  
COVID-19 and Immigration 
Detention in the USA: Time to Act13 
Keller AS, Wagner BD. 
Comment 
Lancet Public Health  
Spotlight on Jails: COVID-19 
Mitigation Policies Needed Now14 
Wurcel AG, Dauria E, Zaller 
N, et al. 
Correspondence 
Clin Infect Dis. 
COVID-19 Pandemic Poses 
Challenge for Jails and Prisons15 
Stephenson, J. 
Comment 
JAMA Health 
Forum 
Detained during a pandemic: A 
postcard from the Midwest16 
Gorman G, Ramaswamy M.  
Editorial 
Public Health Nurs. 
The challenge of preventing COVID-
19 spread in correctional facilities17 
Rubin, R.  
Perspective 
JAMA 
Preparedness, prevention and control 
of COVID-19 in prisons and other 
places of detention18 
World Health Organization. 
Technical document 
World Health 
Organization 
Caring for persons in detention 
suffering with mental illness during 
the Covid-19 outbreak19 
Liebrenz, M., Bhugra, D., 
Buadze, A. e Schleifer, R. 
Comment 
Forensic science 
international. Mind 
and law 
The Epidemiological Implications of 
Incarceration Dynamics in Jails for 
Community, Corrections Officer, and 
Incarcerated Population Risks from 
COVID-1920 
Lofgren, E., Lum, K., 
Horowitz, A., Madubuowu, B., 
& Fefferman, N. 
Preprint:Mathematical 
Modelagem  
medRxiv 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 3: Measures to combat the novel coronavirus in the Brazilian Penal System 
Extrication 
Reassessment of socio-educational measures for adolescents with: progression from hospitalization to semi-freedom; 
temporary suspension or remission of the measure. Preference given to: pregnant, lactating, indigenous or disabled; 
hospitalized in units with reduced capacity or in units without health care. 
Reassessment of sentences of provisional prisons that have exceeded 90 days or that are related to crime without violence 
or serious threat to the person. 
Reassessment of provisional arrests of people in the risk group or prisoners in units without medical assistance. 
Consider regime progression for people in a at-risk group or who are in overcrowded prisons or without health care. 
In the absence of space for adequate isolation, placing the person arrested with suspicion or confirmation of COVID-19 
under house arrest. 
No entrapment 
Alternative socio-educational measures and suspension of provisional hospitalizations for adolescents whose offense did 
not incurred violence. Preference given to: pregnant, lactating, indigenous or disabled; hospitalized in units with reduced 
capacity or in units without health care. 
House arrest for people arrested for child support debt. 
Maximum exceptionality of new pretrial detention orders, observing the protocol of the health authorities. 
Other measures 
Suspension of the duty of periodic submission to the court of persons on provisional release. 
Extension of the period of return or postponement of the granting of the temporary exit benefit. 
Restriction or reduction of visits to prisoners. 
Temporary replacement of prison officers who are part of the risk group. 
Education campaigns on the novel coronavirus. 
Increased frequency of cleaning of cells and common spaces. 
Avoid shared transportation of people deprived of liberty. 
Screening of prisoners, staff and visitors. 
Supply of personal protective equipment (PPE) to employees. 
Uninterrupted supply of water to persons deprived of liberty and public servants of the units. 
Isolation of suspected or confirmed cases in prison. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Measures to combat the new coronavirus in prisons worldwide 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
55%
60%
65%
70%
Meals inside the cells or limiting cell exit
New prisons inauguration
Health education activities
Isolation centers for infected  prisoners
Mass testing
New admited prisoners isolation
Strengthening of personal hygiene measures
Pardon or provisional release
Screening on admission  of new  prisoners or visitors  and officials
Cells clearing or disinfection
Visitations supension or reduction
