We present a dataset containing the reported number of COVID-19 cases and deaths at municipal
and federative units level in Brazil. Data is aggregated daily from oﬃcial sources with the most
updated numbers, providing a reliable, free and simple resource for researchers, health authorities
and general public. Interactive pages in English and Portuguese are available, containing maps,
graphs and tables with all the data.
Data about recovered, suspected and tests made are also
available for most federative units.

An outbreak of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-
19) was identiﬁed in Wuhan,
China,
in December
2019 [1], caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). It has spread to provinces
of mainland China and then to all six World Health Orga-
nization (WHO) regions [2]. In Brazil, the ﬁrst imported
case was conﬁrmed on February 25, 2020 in the city of S˜ao
Paulo/SP, and was oﬃcially announced by the Ministry
of Health of Brazil – Minist´erio da Sa´ude (MS) – one day
later [3]. Since then, the Federal Government of Brazil
reports daily the total number of cases and deaths for
each federative unit (UF)1, that corresponds to the Fed-
eral District (Distrito Federal) and 26 states. However,
Brazil has 5570 municipalities with varied population dis-
tributions and characteristics and oﬃcial information at
least at municipal level is essential for researchers, health
authorities and the general public. In order to provide re-
liable data also at municipal level, we developed an online
interactive page to visualize and track the reported cases
of COVID-19 in Brazil by using oﬃcial data from each
federative unit reports.
These reports contain data at
municipal level for both the number of cases and deaths.

The
page
[https://covid19br.wcota.me/en]
was
ﬁrst shared publicly March 13, and contains interac-
tive plots of the number of conﬁrmed, deaths, recovered
and suspected cases. A full dataset is publicly available
and updated daily through a GitHub repository [https:
//github.com/wcota/covid19br] in CSV format. Dur-
ing Mar 13–Apr 09 the data collection was done by read-
ing the reports and updating the number of cases for each
municipality and states. On April 10 a semi-automated
strategy was adopted by using municipal data source
via Brasil.IO [https://brasil.io/dataset/covid19/
caso/], that started to collect data in a similar way by
a task force of 40 volunteers. As before, the municipal
level data is aggregated to the number oﬃcialy reported
by Minist´erio da Sa´ude, see Sec. A for details. In order to
keep the dataset updated almost in real time, we moni-
tor the cases compiled by the Twitter account @Coro-
navirusbra1 [https://twitter.com/coronavirusbra1]
through a Google Sheet. Before updating the dataset, we
∗E-mail: wesley.cota@ufv.br; Homepage: https://wcota.me/
1 Unidade Federativa, in Portuguese.
conﬁrm the case numbers with the oﬃcial sources cited
by the data streams. Data is also available for the number
of recovered, suspects and tests made in each federative
unit, when available.

In Fig. 1 we present the comparison between the num-
ber of reported cases by Minist´erio da Sa´ude and the
ones aggregated in this dataset. Oﬃcial data from the
Brazilian government is updated only once a day, result-
ing in diﬀerences in the numbers of cases reported each
day. Note that while the government assumes that the
ﬁrst case was registered on February 26, other sources
conﬁrm that the epidemics started on February 25 in
Brazil. We also present the temporal evolution for each
federative unit in Fig. 2. As a result of the aggregation of
federative unit data before being conﬁrmed by the fed-
eral government, some small diﬀerences are found.
In
addition, we also provide georeferenced data at munici-
pal level, allowing the visualization of the cases in a map
such as the one presented in Fig. 3.

We believe our dataset can help eﬀorts for modeling,
tracking and controlling the current outbreak situation
in Brazil, and we plan to continue updating this dataset.

We thank Carlos Achy (@coronavirusbra1), ´Alvaro
Justen and all volunteers of Brasil.IO project for data
contribution.
We also thank F´abio Rehm,
Rafael
Calpena Rodrigues, Lucas Bil´o and Silvio C. Ferreira for
useful discussions. This study was ﬁnanced in part by
the Coordena¸c˜ao de Aperfei¸coamento de Pessoal de N´ıvel
Superior – Brasil (Capes) – Finance Code 001.

This dataset aggregates data from at least three main
sources:

1. Minist´erio da Sa´ude (MS) [https://covid.
saude.gov.br/]:
Oﬃcial page of the Brazilian
Ministry of Health that updates the number of
cases per federative unit once a day. Only the num-
ber of cases and deaths for each federative unit are
used.

2. Brasil.IO
(IO)
[https://brasil.io/dataset/
covid19/caso/]: Data compiled daily from the of-
ﬁcial epidemiological bulletins of each federative
unit. This data is available at municipal level, con-
taining the number of cases and deaths for each
municipality.

3. @coronavirusbra1
(TW)
[https://twitter.
com/coronavirusbra1]:
Twitter
account
ad-
ministrated by Carlos Achy that reports the
most recent number of conﬁrmed, recovered and
suspected
cases
released
by
oﬃcial
websites,
social accounts and news of each federative unit.
In addition, the number of tests made is also
available.
The data comes from a Google Sheet
[https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/
1MWQE3s4ef6dxJosyqvsFaV4fDyElxnBUB6gMGvs3rEc/
edit?usp=sharing].

We denote the set of the number of cases (deaths)
for
each
day
as
C
=
{ct1, ct2, . . . , ctN }
(D
=
{dt1, dt2, . . . , dtN }), where cti (dti) is the total number of
cases (deaths) notiﬁed up to the day ti. The last day of
data update is denoted by tN. First, we collect this num-
ber from the MS source for each federative unit. Then,
we collect the set from the IO source for each municipal-
ity. If the number of cases (or deaths) for each federative
unit by IO is greater than the ones of the MS dataset,
these numbers are updated accordingly. If it is smaller,
the number of the MS source prevails. The last dataset
(TW) is used only for the last day tN of data update.
This ensures that the number of cases for each federative
unit remains constantly updated, even if the ﬁrst two
sources have not yet reported those cases. For the num-
ber of recovered and suspected cases, and of tests made,
we use the TW dataset historical data, that is available
for most of the federative units.

The full dataset is available in CSV format at a GitHub
repository [https://github.com/wcota/covid19br]. It
is freely available by the Creative Commons Attribution
Share Alike 4.0 International License cba. An interac-
tive website with the map, graphs and full tables is also
available in English [https://covid19br.wcota.me/en]
and Portuguese [https://covid19br.wcota.me/]. The
2019 Brazilian population estimate provided by the In-
stituto Brasileiro de Pesquisas Estat´ısticas (IBGE) [4] is
used to compute the number of cases and deaths per
100 000 inhabitants.

This
data
is
available
in
the
ﬁle
cases-brazil-cities-time.csv.
It
contains
the
temporal evolution for the number of cases and deaths
for each municipality with at least one reported case in
Brazil. The following columns are available:

• date: reported date, in YYYY-MM-DD format,

• country:
country of the data, which is always
“Brazil”,

• state: short name of the federative unit (UF), or
“TOTAL” when referring to the whole country,

• city: full name of the municipality in City/UF
format. It can be “CASO SEM LOCALIZAC¸ ˜AO
DEFINIDA/UF”2, referring to those cases in the
federative unit that does not have its municipality
deﬁned,

• ibgeID: unique ID for the municipality provided
by the Instituto Brasileiro de Pesquisas Estat´ısticas
(IBGE) [4],

• newDeaths:
diﬀerence between the number of
deaths of the corresponding date and the previous
one,

• deaths:
accumulated number of deaths in that
date,

• newCases: diﬀerence between the number of cases
of the corresponding date and the previous one,

• totalCases: accumulated number of cases in that
date,

• deaths_per_100k_inhabitants:
number
of
deaths per 100 000 inhabitants for that location,

• totalCases_per_100k_inhabitants:
number of
cases per 100 000 inhabitants for that location,

• deaths_by_totalCases: ratio between the num-
ber of deaths and cases.

This
data
is
available
in
the
ﬁle
cases-brazil-states.csv.
It
contains
the
tem-
poral evolution for the number of cases, deaths and
recovered for each federative unit with at least one
reported case in Brazil.
The following columns are
available:

• date: reported date, in YYYY-MM-DD format,

• country:
country of the data, which is always
“Brazil”,

• state: short name of the federative unit (UF), or
“TOTAL” when referring to the whole country,

• city: in this ﬁle, it is always “TOTAL”,

• newDeaths:
diﬀerence between the number of
deaths of the corresponding date and the previous
one,

• deaths:
accumulated number of deaths in that
date,

• newCases: diﬀerence between the number of cases
of the corresponding date and the previous one,

• totalCases: accumulated number of cases in that
date,

• deathsMS: accumulated number of deaths in that
date reported by the MS source,

• totalCasesMS: accumulated number of cases in
that date reported by the MS source,

• deaths_per_100k_inhabitants:
number
of
deaths per 100 000 inhabitants for that location,

• totalCases_per_100k_inhabitants:
number of
cases per 100 000 inhabitants for that location,

• deaths_by_totalCases: ratio between the num-
ber of deaths and cases,

• recovered:
number of recovered individuals re-
ported by the TW historical data. It is empty if
no data is available,

• suspects: number of suspect cases reported by the
TW historical data. It is empty if no data is avail-
able,

• tests: number of tests made reported by the TW
historical data. It is empty if no data is available,

• tests_per_100k_inhabitants:
number of tests
per 100 000 inhabitants for that location.

This
data
is
available
in
the
ﬁle
cases-brazil-cities.csv. It shows only the informa-
tion corresponding to the most recent date reported in
the ﬁle cases-brazil-cities-time.csv. The columns
are the same as in cases-brazil-cities-time.csv,
except by date.

This
data
is
available
in
the
ﬁle
cases-brazil-total.csv.
It shows only the infor-
mation corresponding to the most recent date reported
in the ﬁle cases-brazil-state.csv. The columns are
the same as in cases-brazil-state.csv, except by
date. It also has an extra column notConfirmedByMS
that computes the diﬀerence between totalCases and
totalCasesMS.

This data is available in the ﬁle cases-gps.csv. It
is an auxiliary ﬁle that provides the number of cases or
deaths for each municipality, with GPS information ob-
tained from the Nominatim API by OpenStreetMap. The
columns are the following:

• type: it can be “0” (case without municipality in-
formation) and “1” (case with municipality infor-
mation). The deaths are indicated by prepending
the letter “D” to it,

• name: name of the municipality, or “CASO SEM
LOCALIZAC¸ ˜AO DEFINIDA/UF” when the mu-
nicipality is not known.

• lat: latitude information,

• lon: longitude information,

• total: total number of cases (or deaths) for that
location,

• total_per_100k_inhabitants: the total number
per 100 000 inhabitants.

An example of this data is shown in Fig. 3.

This data is available in the ﬁle sources.csv. It con-
tains the date of access (date) and URL (URL) for each
reference used to compile the dataset.

The comparison between the reported number of
deaths by MS and the ones in our dataset is shown in
Fig. C.1. The number of deaths, recovered and suspects
for each federative unit are shown in Figs. C.2, C.3 and
C.4, respectively.
