Publication status: Preprint has been submitted for publication in journal
ARCHIVING AND LANGUAGE DOCUMENTATION
Patience Epps, Susan Smythe Kung, Denny Moore, Jorge Rosés Labrada, Zachary O’Hagan, Ana
Paula Brandao
https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
Submitted on: 2022-09-17
Posted on: 2022-09-21 (version 1)
(YYYY-MM-DD)
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
 
ARCHIVING AND LANGUAGE DOCUMENTATION 
 
 
OS ACERVOS E A DOCUMENTAÇÃO LINGUÍSTICA 
 
 
Experience report 
 
 
Patience Epps 
 
The University of Texas at Austin, Department of Linguistics, Austin, Texas, 
pattieepps@austin.utexas.edu, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7429-7885 
 
Susan Smythe Kung 
 
The University of Texas at Austin, Archive of the Indigenous Languages of Latin America 
(AILLA), Austin, Texas, skung@austin.utexas.edu, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3582-1613 
 
Denny Moore 
 
Museu Paraense Emílio Goeldi, Área de Linguística, Belém, Pará, dennymoore5@gmail.com, 
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6249-1317 
 
Zachary O’Hagan 
 
University of California, California Language Archive & Survey of California and Other 
Indian Languages, Berkeley, California, zohagan@berkeley.edu, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-
2720-2070 
 
Jorge Rosés Labrada 
 
University of Alberta, Department of Linguistics, Edmonton, Alberta, jrosesla@ualberta.ca, 
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4454-7396 
 
Ana Paula Brandão 
 
Universidade Federal do Pará, Faculdades de Letras e Programa de Pós-graduação em Letras, 
Belém, Pará, apbrandao@ufpa.br, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1635-9929. 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
As more and more of the world’s languages become endangered, their documentation provides 
key resources for linguists and communities. Documentary linguists look to digital archives as 
an essential resource for ensuring the preservation, conservation, and access of the outcomes of 
their work. In this article, we consider the benefits and challenges associated with archiving in 
language documentation, relating to issues of preservation, conservation, access, ownership, 
and use of materials. We draw on our accumulated knowledge as scholars who are deeply 
involved in administering, contributing to, and using language archives, particularly relating to 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
the indigenous languages of Latin America. We focus in particular on the relevance of language 
archiving in Brazil, and its significance for scholars, community members, and other 
stakeholders. Our discussion considers the steps that are needed to ensure the quality and 
longevity of resources; the principles and strategies by which archived materials may be made 
available; and ways in which language archives can inform ongoing work with indigenous 
languages. As we lay out here, language archives provide key resources for scholars and for 
communities who wish to revitalize, maintain, or simply remember their linguistic and cultural 
heritage. 
 
KEYWORDS 
 
Language documentation, Archiving, Indigenous languages of Latin America. 
 
 
RESUMO 
 
Enquanto que mais e mais línguas do mundo se tornam ameaçadas, sua documentação fornece 
recursos importantes para linguistas e comunidades. Os linguistas olham para os acervos 
digitais como um recurso essencial para garantir a preservação, conservação e acesso dos 
resultados de seu trabalho. Neste artigo, consideramos os benefícios e desafios associados ao 
arquivamento na documentação linguística, relacionados a questões de preservação, 
conservação, acesso, propriedade e uso de materiais. Baseamo-nos em nosso conhecimento 
acumulado como acadêmicos profundamente envolvidos na administração, contribuição e uso 
de acervos linguísticos, particularmente relacionados às línguas indígenas da América Latina. 
Nós nos concentramos em particular na relevância dos acervos linguísticos no Brasil e sua 
importância para acadêmicos, membros da comunidade e outras partes interessadas. Nossa 
discussão considera os passos necessários para garantir a qualidade e longevidade dos recursos; 
os princípios e estratégias pelos quais os materiais arquivados podem ser disponibilizados; e 
maneiras pelas quais os acervos linguísticos podem informar o trabalho em andamento com as 
línguas indígenas. Conforme apresentamos aqui, os acervos linguísticos fornecem recursos 
importantes para acadêmicos e comunidades que desejam revitalizar, manter ou simplesmente 
lembrar sua herança linguística e cultural. 
 
PALAVRAS-CHAVE 
 
Documentação linguística, Arquivamento, Línguas indígenas da América Latina. 
 
 
Author contributions: 
Patience Epps: Conceptualization, Resources, Visualization, Writing - Original Draft (§1, §7), 
Writing - Proofreading and Editing. 
Susan Smythe Kung: Conceptualization, Resources, Visualization, Writing - Original Draft 
(§2), Writing - Proofreading and Editing. 
Denny Moore: Conceptualization, Resources, Visualization, Writing - Original Draft (§3), 
Writing - Proofreading and Editing. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
Zachary O’Hagan: Conceptualization, Resources, Visualization, Writing - Original Draft (§5), 
Writing - Proofreading and Editing. 
Jorge Rosés Labrada: Conceptualization, Resources, Visualization, Writing - Original Draft 
(§4), Writing - Proofreading and Editing. 
Ana Paula Brandão: Conceptualization, Resources, Visualization, Writing - Original Draft 
(§6), Writing - Proofreading and Editing. 
 
Introduction1 
 
As more and more of the world’s languages become endangered, their documentation 
provides key resources for scholars and communities. Documentary materials provide an 
empirical basis to inform our knowledge about what is possible in human language, a register 
of diverse cultural and discursive traditions, and a tangible record of community heritage, 
offering future generations access to the voices of their parents and grandparents. Yet these 
materials tend to be fragile and ephemeral. Audio and video cassettes break down, notebooks 
mildew and fade, and even SD cards and hard drives are susceptible to fire, flood, and changing 
technologies – as underscored by tragic events like the 2018 fire in Brazil’s Museu Nacional, 
in which countless precious recordings and manuscripts were lost. More and more, linguists 
and others look to digital archives as an essential resource in ensuring the preservation of and 
access to the outcomes of language documentation work. 
 
In this article, we consider the benefits and challenges associated with archiving in 
language documentation. Our discussion draws on our accumulated knowledge as scholars who 
are deeply involved in administering, contributing to, and drawing on language archives, with 
an emphasis on the indigenous languages of Latin America. We focus in particular on the 
relevance of language archiving in Brazil, and its significance for scholars, community 
members, and other stakeholders. 
 
We begin by sketching out the basics of archiving for language documentation 
initiatives – why archiving matters, what it offers, and how to go about it (§2). Toward the goal 
of ensuring the quality, longevity, and accessibility of resources, we consider contemporary 
best practices in digital curation, the differences between an established language archive and 
other online platforms, the benefits of archiving, and decisions regarding what to archive and 
when to do it. We also explore the question of deciding where to archive – that is, determining 
what archives are available and how they are set up and maintained – particularly with an eye 
 
1 This article follows a presentation in Abralin ao Vivo on July 11, 2020. The recorded presentation is available at 
https://aovivo.abralin.org/lives/archiving-and-language-documentation/.  
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
to Brazilian indigenous languages and associated documentation projects; the archive of the 
Museu Paraense Emílio Goeldi provides an instructive case study (§3). Our discussion then 
considers archives and communities, focusing on the ethics of informed consent and issues of 
community access to documentation, informed by a case study from Jorge Emilio Rosés 
Labrada’s work with Mako speakers in Venezuela (§4). The significance of archiving legacy 
materials – resulting from documentation carried out prior to the digital era, and frequently 
represented in fragile media with a limited lifespan – is addressed in §5. Finally, §6 returns to 
the Brazilian context with a detailed case study of documentation and archiving projects 
involving two indigenous languages of Brazil, Paresi-Haliti and Enewane Nawe, carried out by 
Ana Paula Brandão, which highlights many of the issues discussed in the previous sections. 
Final observations are offered in §7.   
 
2. Archiving language documentation data 
 
This section lays out principal considerations relating to the importance and process of 
archiving language documentation data. We provide a general assessment of the significance 
of this initiative (§2.1), followed by an overview of the types of digital repositories (§2.2) and 
the benefits of archiving for language documentation (§2.3). We explain how digital language 
archives differ from other online platforms (§2.4), and offer some advice on how and when 
language documentation data should be archived (§2.5). Throughout this article, we use the 
term data to refer to language documentation materials; that is, recorded examples and/or 
observations of spoken or signed language that can be processed, annotated, and analyzed (see 
e.g. GOOD, 2022). Primary data are the raw audio or video recordings or written observations 
of language, including narratives, oral histories, elicitation, conversations, interviews, and 
experimental protocols; secondary data are transcriptions, translations, morphological 
segmentations, glosses, and other types of annotation that require some level of preliminary 
analysis to create (KUNG, et al., 2020; HIMMELMANN, 2012; THIEBERGER and BEREZ, 
2012). For accessible overviews of language archiving and its history, see also Henke and 
Berez-Kroeker (2016), Berez-Kroeker and Henke (2018), Kaplan and Lemov (2019), and Kung 
(2020). 
 
2.1. The importance of archiving  
In his groundbreaking article that defined the field of language documentation, 
Himmelmann (1998) includes archiving as one of the four key steps in creating what he calls 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
“a language documentation” (p. 171); that is, a collection of transcribed and annotated 
audiovisual recordings with their accompanying metadata. Metadata are the supporting 
contextual, technical, and administrative documentation that helps to explain the data, including 
any keys (e.g., codes, orthographies) needed to understand, analyze, and reuse them (KUNG et 
al., 2020). Woodbury (2003) calls such a collection of primary data and the associated metadata 
a “corpus” and he includes archiving as one of six criteria that establish the overall quality of a 
documentary corpus.  
Key reasons to archive language data are to ensure their longevity and accessibility. As 
we discuss below, digital repositories offer options for replicability and protection against the 
hazards of fire, flood, loss, mold, insects, etc. that threaten the conservation of physical 
materials, such as those seen in Figure 1. 
Figure 1. Physical copies of language documentation materials: boxes of papers, stacks of audio cassettes, 
handwritten and photocopied notebooks (ailla:257492, DSC_0001; ailla:257543, DSC_0052; P. Epps) 
 
 
Himmelmann (2006) expounds on the importance of archiving the primary data that 
result from a research project in addition to publishing the analytical results of the project, that 
is the Boasian trilogy of a grammar (sketch), dictionary, and set of texts (WOODBURY, 2003). 
When the primary data are archived, those data can be reused for additional language 
documentation work, as well as other types of linguistic analysis. Further, archiving the primary 
and secondary data allows for the analytical output to be verifiable and reproducible 
(HIMMELMANN, 2006; BEREZ-KROEKER et al., 2018). Ultimately, archiving primary and 
secondary data in a digital repository where they are publicly accessible facilitates data reuse, 
and provides a stable means for citing the data (for recent guidance, see CONZETT and DE 
SMEDT, 2022), in the form of a persistent identifier. Persistent identifiers such as Digital 
Object Identifiers (DOIs), Handles, and Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs) allow creators of 
the data to receive proper attribution for their work (BEREZ-KROEKER et al., 2018).  
Language documentation materials are collected with great effort, time, and (often) 
money; however, they can represent something much more profound to the speakers: their 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
culture, identity, and self-determination (UNDRIP, 2007; CARROLL et al., 2020). Thus, it is 
extremely important to ensure that speakers have access to the documentation. Ideally, copies 
of the documentation are left in the community from the outset, but otherwise a copy should be 
repatriated or returned to the community (KUNG 2020; VAPNARSKY, 2020; R. MILLER, 
2021; see §4.3). Putting the data into a digital archive is a form of digital repatriation (KUNG, 
2020), assuming communities have relatively unobstructed access to the data. While this is not 
the only way that data should be repatriated to the community of origin, it is one way to share 
these materials with the community while also preserving them for future generations of 
speakers. Nevertheless, it is still the case that many indigenous peoples and communities all 
over the world do not have (adequate) access to the internet. In these cases, a local, regional, or 
national archive, library, museum, school, governmental office, or some other location that is 
accessible to the speaker community should be identified, and a copy of the data should be 
deposited there (WILBUR, 2014) in addition to being deposited in a more broadly accessible 
digital repository, which will be better equipped to preserve the digital data for the long term 
(see below). Regardless of exactly where the data are archived, sharing and repatriating the 
primary and secondary data and resulting publications supports language maintenance, 
reclamation, and revitalization efforts by making materials available to speakers and their 
descendants. While we would hope that the data could be used for language education, 
maintenance, or revitalization efforts, it is impossible to foresee the actual or exact uses that the 
speakers and their descendants will make of the data (for recent examples see LUKANIEC, 
2022; SPENCE, 2018; and VAPNARSKY, 2020). Nevertheless, the data contain the languages 
and cultural heritage of these speakers, and they deserve the right to decide how and when to 
use them (HOLTON et al., 2022). 
 
2.2. Digital repositories 
 
Throughout this article, we use the term archive to refer to a repository of materials that 
are saved and preserved by an organization or institution so that they can be reused in the present 
and the future. An archive can hold analog materials, digital materials (both born digital and 
digitized) or both. A digital repository is an archive of digital materials or records, and a 
(digital) language archive is an archive that specializes in linguistic cultural heritage and 
language materials or data. In the field of language documentation, the most quoted definition 
of an archive is from Johnson (2004, p. 142): “An archive is a trusted repository created and 
maintained by an institution with a demonstrated commitment to permanence and the long-term 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
preservation of archived resources”. Johnson’s definition does not mention the digital 
component, so we offer an updated definition from Trevor Owens, the Head of Digital Content 
Management at the US Library of Congress. This definition emphasizes the misconception that 
software designed for digital asset management is the same thing as a digital repository. From 
this point forward, we use the terms archive and repository interchangeably. Owens (2018, p. 
4) writes: “A repository is not a piece of software… A repository is the sum of financial 
resources, hardware, staff time, and ongoing implementation of policies and planning to ensure 
long-term access to content. Any software system you use […] to preserve and provide access 
to digital content is by necessity temporary […] it likely will not last forever […] Institutions 
make preservation possible” (emphasis in the original). There are some recurring themes across 
these two definitions: institution, commitment, ongoing, long-term, and preservation. We will 
touch on each of these themes in this section, but the take-away here is that you cannot simply 
build a digital archive and forget about it. An archive is an ongoing commitment on the part of 
the institution or organization that decides to create it.  
Fortunately, there are many institutions around the world that have made the 
commitment required to maintain digital archives. The Digital Endangered Languages and 
Musics Archives Network (DELAMAN, https://www.delaman.org/), is a network of member 
archives that specialize in language documentation data. Some of these archives are only digital, 
while others have physical holdings as well. Some specialize in a specific area of the world 
(e.g., the Archive of the Indigenous Languages of Latin America, AILLA, has a regional focus 
indicated in its title), others will accept material from anywhere in the world (e.g., the California 
Language Archive, CLA). Some archives will accept only data associated with a particular 
grant or funder (e.g., the Endangered Languages Archive, ELAR, mainly accepts materials 
collected with grants from the Endangered Languages Documentation Programme), while 
others primarily accept materials in or about a specific language (e.g., Standing Rock Sioux 
Tribe Language and Culture Institute). As part of the generalized increase in awareness of the 
endangered state of the majority of the world's languages, several Latin American institutions, 
including in Brazil, also committed to hosting local language archives; see Seifart et al. (2008) 
for an in-depth discussion of the early stages of this process. Unfortunately, many of these 
archives have not stood the test of time. Two repositories in Brazil, however, have continued to 
operate and are discussed here in §3. Other archives have also been created more recently, such 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
as the Archivo de Lenguas, Culturas y Memorias Históricas del Ecuador, which has 
institutional support from FLACSO Ecuador (http://languages.flacso.edu.ec/).2 
 
While the above-named archives cover a wide range of geographic locations and 
collecting requirements, they might not be a good fit for all language documentation projects. 
Alternative archives include other types of digital data repositories such as those managed by 
many universities. Linguistic datasets (but not primary data from language documentation) may 
be submitted to the Tromsø Repository of Language and Linguistics (TROLLing, 
https://site.uit.no/trolling/about/). Primary and secondary data, as well as datasets, may be 
archived in general data repositories such as Zenodo (https://zenodo.org/) and the Harvard 
DataVerse (https://dataverse.harvard.edu/). Additional possibilities can be found in the Registry 
of Research Data Repositories (https://www.re3data.org/).   
 
2.3. Advantages of digital language archives 
 
For researchers engaged in documentation projects, there are many advantages to 
archiving language documentation materials (data). These include simplified format migration, 
personal organization, accessibility, discoverability, graded access, rights management, 
collaboration, citability, and long-term digital preservation. 
Anyone who has ever had to copy field recordings from an obsolete medium (e.g., 
cassette tapes) to another format, tried to open an old file in a new version of the program, or 
endeavored to find a program that can even open the old file, understands the headaches 
involved in format migration.3 However, researchers who archive language documentation 
materials in a digital repository never need to worry about format migration again because it is 
part of the archival workflows that are overseen by the archive's personnel.  
Archiving also facilitates personal organization. Shortly after returning from the field, 
most researchers still remember where all of the files they created are located and how they are 
organized. However, as time passes, memory fades, and it becomes much harder to remember 
where files are, how they are organized, how they relate to each other, and the relevant metadata 
(i.e., contextual information) that will allow for their future reuse, either by the researcher who 
created them or by others. The situation is amplified for digital files, which cannot easily be 
distinguished and, thus, will need to be viewed or opened to be identified. The solution is to 
 
2FLACSO stands for Facultad Latinoamericana de Ciencias Sociales. 
3 See Han (2022) for a recent related discussion of the many ways data can be transformed. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
archive language documentation data, as well as the associated metadata, as soon as possible 
after they are created. Once the data and metadata are archived in a trustworthy repository, they 
can always be found and accessed again. Researchers no longer need to remember where files 
are  stored (e.g., on which external hard drive, laptop, or cloud storage system), and they no 
longer need to juggle the work of handling multiple copies and backups of the data. Archiving 
helps to ensure that the data and metadata are not lost, thrown out, or forgotten about.  
Once the materials and metadata are archived, they are accessible to (i.e., they can be 
accessed by) their creators, as well as by collaborators, other researchers, members of the 
language community, and anyone else who might need access to the data. Furthermore, digital 
language archives are constructed in ways that support discoverability of materials, that is, the 
ability of users to find or discover materials they are looking for. Discoverability is relevant 
both to searches within the archive itself (via facet or targeted searching, advanced searches, 
etc.), and to searches carried out via broader internet platforms such as Google indexing and 
metadata harvesting by the Open Language Archives Community (OLAC). 
 
While there are digital repositories that claim to be purely open access, all digital 
language archives have rules for how users may interact with the holdings, and most digital 
language archives have graded access, by which certain materials may be restricted to particular 
users and/or conditions of use (see also §2.5). Regarding the rules of use, all digital language 
archives have some sort of terms or conditions that the online visitors must agree to before they 
can access the media files. Many digital archives require a user to create a free account and log 
in before they can access the media files. However, the catalog information (i.e., the metadata) 
is usually publicly accessible, meaning that anyone who lands on the archive’s web page can 
access and read it. Most language archives have some form of graded access to media files, 
though the way graded access works varies greatly between archives. AILLA uses numbered 
levels that indicate grades of access; other archives have specialized user roles and some use 
color coding to indicate who can access specific materials.  
 
Most digital archives that specialize in language documentation data handle rights 
management similarly, though exact details vary between archives. In most cases, the original 
rights holders4 retain all of their intellectual and/or cultural property rights. The rights holders 
give non-exclusive licenses to the archive and the archive’s users; details of the licenses vary 
 
4 The rights holders are the persons who have the right to claim copyright over a creation or to claim the rights to 
the intellectual property, cultural property, moral rights, performance rights, or other rights inherent to a work or 
creation by virtue of having created it, group membership/affiliation, or inheritance. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
between archives and according to specific copyright laws of the country where each archive is 
located. Commercial use of the data is never allowed. 
 
Data archiving facilitates collaboration on many levels. For researchers who are 
engaged in remote collaboration with the speech community or other researchers, archiving 
data as they are created or as analyses are finished helps the entire project team stay organized. 
Also, once data are organized and archived, they can be discovered by other researchers, which 
in turn can lead to new opportunities for collaboration. Finally, archiving data helps to facilitate 
the reuse of the primary data for various research purposes, including a great deal of work that 
is being done in the areas of natural language processing and linguistic typology. Finally, 
archived data can be cited, and this is crucial for creating reproducible research (BEREZ-
KROEKER et al., 2018). Some journals, such as Language Documentation & Conservation, 
request that the data sets associated with an article be archived and cited appropriately. Thus, 
researchers can and should cite their own archived data, and researchers who use archived data 
must cite them as well.  
 
Finally, a trustworthy digital repository has an active plan for the long-term digital 
preservation of the digital media files and associated metadata. According to the Digital 
Preservation Coalition (DPC), digital preservation "[r]efers to the series of managed activities 
necessary to ensure continued access to digital materials for as long as necessary. [...] [It] refers 
to all of the actions required to maintain access to digital materials beyond the limits of media 
failure or technological and organizational change.” Long-term preservation is the "continued 
access to digital materials, or at least to the information contained in them, indefinitely” (DPC, 
2015). This means that digital preservation is much more than just backing up files. Digital 
preservation work includes migrating data and metadata from one format to another and from 
one software system to another as technology changes. It means ensuring accurate redundancy 
of data (meaning that there are duplicate copies stored on various media types and in multiple 
locations); and it means monitoring the health of all of the files in all of the locations on a 
regular basis. According to Owens (2018, p. 5), “preservation is the result of ongoing work of 
people and commitments of resources. The work is never finished […] It is not something that 
can be thought of as a one-time cost.”  
 
2.4 Differences between language archives and other online platforms 
 
Now that we have discussed the advantages of archiving language documentation data, 
we want to contrast digital archives with other online platforms that are commonly confused 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
with digital archives, such as social media sharing platforms, websites, and cloud-based file 
storage.  
Social media sharing platforms, like YouTube, Vimeo and SoundCloud (see Figure 2), 
facilitate sharing video and audio files with communities, speakers, and others because their 
content is easily discoverable via online search engines. They facilitate rights management 
because they allow the person who uploads the file to choose between traditional copyright or 
the application of a Creative Commons license.5 However, most people do not have a sufficient 
understanding of either traditional copyright or the application of Creative Commons licenses 
to make an informed decision. These platforms also have their own versions of graded access 
in that the content may be kept private or made public.  
Websites also facilitate content sharing, and code can be added to make the pages 
discoverable by search engines. While limiting access to content is possible, it can be a 
technically challenging process. Traditional copyright automatically applies to websites, but the 
website developer can choose to apply Rights Statements6 or open licenses, such as those 
managed by Creative Commons, to the webpages and/or the linked files.  
File storage systems, like DropBox, Google Drive, OneDrive, and Box, are good for 
sharing files with your collaborators while you are still working on them, as well as for 
controlling access to the files, but they do not have built-in rights management, and they are not 
discoverable in web searches. 
While all these options are great for sharing data, none of these systems is committed to 
the long-term digital preservation of files or data. While they all might offer some form of 
content backup, they do not promise long-term preservation.  The terms of use of these 
platforms include their right to discontinue service and delete accounts and their contents. 
Moreover, some platforms, such as YouTube, retain copies of materials even when files are 
deleted by their owners/posters, or may be subject to automated downloads by other websites 
– an obvious problem where sensitive data are concerned (RICE, 2021). 
 
5 Creative Commons licenses are a type of open license that work in conjunction with traditional copyright; see 
https://creativecommons.org/ (Brazil: https://br.creativecommons.net/) for more information.  
6 https://rightsstatements.org/en/ 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
 
Figure 2. Video on YouTube of a story told in Caquinte by Antonina Salazar Torres 
(recorded by Zachary O’Hagan, permanently archived with the California Language Archive, 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.7297/X2Z60M7W) 
 
2.5 How and when to archive language documentation data 
 
Prior to the 21st century, the results of language documentation were typically archived 
at the end of a researcher’s career or even after their death. However, with the advent of born-
digital recording equipment, language archives, and data archiving requirements, most 
researchers today do not wait that long.  
 
Today’s motto – as frequently voiced by archivists – is “Archive early and archive 
often!”. Many language archives recommend progressive or incremental archiving. Under this 
model, a researcher or research team submits primary data (e.g., audio and video recordings 
and photographs), always accompanied by the relevant metadata (such as names of participants, 
date, location, languages used, and descriptive information to contextualize why the media files 
were created), to a digital repository as soon as possible after the media files are created (see 
step 1 in Figure 3 below).  Secondary data (e.g., annotations, transcriptions, interlinear glossed 
texts) and analyses or academic output (steps 2 and 3, respectively, in Figure 3) are added later 
after they are finalized (ROBINSON, 2006; NATHAN, 2013; KUNG et al., 2020). In Figure 3, 
the steps represent waves of archiving. Step 1, which involves archiving the primary data and 
relevant metadata, should be done as soon as the fieldwork or data collection phase is complete, 
or even while fieldwork or data collection are still in progress. Step 2, archiving the secondary 
data and relevant metadata, can be done iteratively as the transcriptions and translations are 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
finalized. Step 3, archiving finalized analyses and academic output, along with relevant 
metadata, can also be done iteratively and well into the future. This approach recognizes that, 
for most researchers, or anyone else, there will never be a truly convenient time to archive 
language documentation data. The more time that passes and the more digital files and physical 
materials that accumulate between data collection and archiving, the harder and less convenient 
the archiving process will be, and the longer it will take. Moreover, since everything is fresh in 
a researcher’s mind immediately after a period of fieldwork or data collection, it is much easier 
at that point to organize materials accurately and to make sure that the metadata are thorough.7  
 
 
Figure 3. Progressive archiving (graphic by S. Kung, CC BY-SA 4.0) 
 
 
While archiving is key to the long-term conservation, preservation, accessibility and 
discoverability of language documentation data, not all data are equally appropriate for 
archiving, or for archiving in the same way. Some materials may be culturally or personally 
sensitive to the point that they simply should not be archived at all. Other materials may require 
restricted access, as noted in §2.3 above, such that only certain people may engage with them. 
Sometimes such restrictions may pertain in different ways to, for example, an audio file, a video 
file, or a written transcription of the same event. Examples of potentially sensitive material 
include esoteric or protected knowledge that is not meant to be shared with particular people or 
groups of people (e.g., community outsiders, members of other clans, men vs. women), 
 
7 For more information on navigating the archiving process, see ‘Archiving for the Future: Simple Steps for 
Archiving Language Documentation’ at https://archivingforthefuture.teachable.com/. 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
personally damaging speech, and information that could endanger individuals or communities. 
Language documentation and archiving calls for open and ongoing communication among 
documenters, speakers/signers, and other community members in order to ensure a fully ethical 
and informed process, as we elaborate in §4 below. 
 
Finally, as this section has explored, it is essential when archiving language 
documentation materials to choose a repository that will ensure their long-term preservation 
and accessibility. Many archives with the necessary infrastructure, including many of those in 
the DELAMAN consortium, serve an international community, and should not be viewed as 
proprietary with respect to whatever country might host them. Nonetheless, archiving initiatives 
are valuable at all levels – local, regional, national, and international. In some cases, it may be 
advisable to archive materials in more than one location, in order to meet local priorities while 
also leveraging higher-level infrastructure that offers the most reliable preservation and access 
(see §3.2 and §6 below). 
 
3. Language archives in Brazil: the Museu Goeldi and other initiatives 
 
In this section, we take a closer look at archiving initiatives within Brazil, and their 
relevance for indigenous language documentation within this country. In light of the large 
number of indigenous languages in Brazil and their precarious situation (MOORE, GALUCIO, 
and GABAS, 2008), language documentation is urgent, and it is widely supported among 
indigenous groups. In the survey of the languages of the state of Rondônia by the National 
Inventory of Linguistic Diversity, documentation was indicated as the second priority of 
indigenous people in relation to the language of the groups, with the correction of defective 
orthographies and production of correct written material being the first priority (GALUCIO, 
MOORE and VAN DER VOORT, 2018, p. 217). Many indigenous groups have young people 
trained in computer literacy, a fact that facilitates digital documentation. Potentially, a large 
number of recordings can be produced. Their permanent preservation and availability requires 
a huge storage capacity in digital files. 
In what follows, we describe the collection of indigenous language materials housed at 
the Goeldi Museum (Belém, Brazil), as a concrete example of a language archive based in 
Brazil – how it began and was created, and what it contains (§3.1). We then provide a brief 
overview of other digital language archiving initiatives in Brazil (§3.2), of which the Museu do 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
Índio is currently the principal exemplar.8 We also describe several language documentation 
projects and their outcomes as an illustration of the general need for documentation and 
archiving in the country, and discuss the potential of regional archives. 
 
3.1. The Museu Goeldi archive 
 
The Museu Paraense Emílio Goeldi is a research institute associated with the Ministry 
of Science, Technology and Innovation (MCTI). Located in Belém, in the state of Pará, the 
Goeldi focuses on research on the Amazon. Its Linguistics Area, part of the Human Sciences 
Division, has had a precarious history. In 1986, the Area had no recorder, no computer and only 
a few books. As is often the case in the country, there was little investment in infrastructure. 
However, there was a respected tradition of scientific collections at the Goeldi, and language 
documentation fit well into that tradition. Interns, fellows and visiting researchers fostered 
increasing levels of activity within the Linguistics Area, including documentation. 
The infrastructure began to improve with the acquisition, through research projects, of 
good quality cassette tape recorders, as well as microphones, laptops and solar equipment. In 
1996, the World Bank’s Centers of Excellence program brought Digital Audio Tape (DAT) 
players, Hi-8 video recorders, a Hi-8 editing island and professional storage cabinets. On the 
basis of accumulated experience, Goeldi linguists, including fellows and affiliates, have 
successfully competed in international documentation programs that are favorable to projects 
in developing countries. In the early 2000s, projects from the Endangered Languages 
Documentation Programme (ELDP) and the Dokumentation Bedrohter Sprachen program 
(DOBES) provided more equipment and experience. Documentation and procurement of 
equipment (e.g. solid state recorders with flash memory) continued into the second half of the 
decade, with support from USAID, UNESCO and the Ambassador’s Fund (US Embassy). 
MCTI supplied equipment in 2007, including a server as the basis for a digital repository. 
Documentation (and research) projects continued in the second half of the 2000s, with support 
from CNPq, DOBES and ELDP. This progress was threatened in 2007 by fulminating attacks 
by a small group of linguists, who opposed the ProDocLin Museum's linguistic documentation 
program,9 international documentation programs and digital archives (MOORE and 
 
8 This presentation thus constitutes an update of the discussion about incipient archiving efforts in Brazil described 
in Seifart et al. (2008). 
9 http://prodoclin.museudoindio.gov.br/ 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
GALUCIO, 2016, p. 40). Fortunately, this opposition did not attract support among Brazilian 
linguists and progress continued, both at the Goeldi Museum and in Brazil. 
Through 2009, the activities of linguists based at the Goeldi resulted in a large set of 
diverse recording media: cassette tapes, DAT tapes, mini-disks, Hi-8 tapes, mini-DV tapes, etc. 
Due to time and budget constraints, this collection was simply placed in drawers, without 
systematization. From 2009 to 2014, linguist Ana Vilacy Galucio coordinated a project 
supported by the CFDD/Ministry of Justice to digitize and catalog the collection, following the 
practices of the best international archives. To streamline the process of cataloging and storing 
recordings and their metadata, scripts were created by Sebastian Drude and Rose Costa, 
reducing the time required by 70%. Thus the Goeldi's digital linguistic archive was created. 
Subsequent years saw more equipment purchased and more documentation projects 
conducted. Throughout the evolution of the Goeldi Linguistics Area archive, technology has 
evolved and formats and physical media have changed. However, the conversion of all 
recordings to standardized digital form has mitigated problems of longevity and compatability. 
Some devices, such as microphones, do not become obsolete, and the various types of recorders 
(DAT, mini-DV, etc.) that are currently not used directly for documentation are maintained, 
since they can still be used to access legacy recordings and produce a signal that can be 
digitized. Original recordings are stored on their original media in professional storage cabinets 
. 
Currently, recordings in digital form are stored on a 32TB Network Attached Storage 
(NAS). For security, in case of failure of one of the NAS hard drives, RAID-6 redundancy is 
implemented, reducing the storage capacity to 22TB. The contents of that NAS are copied to 
the new 96TB NAS, whose capacity is reduced to 72TB in light of redundancy (see Figure 4). 
To ensure their safety, in case of risks such as fire or lightning, the two NAS must be kept in 
different buildings. Audio recordings are saved in their original format, i.e. as .wav files. Video 
recordings are saved in their highest definition format and also in compressed (.mpg) format, 
which takes up much less space. These compressed files and audio files are cataloged and stored 
using Language Archiving Technology (LAT) software. Most of them are copied on the server 
of the Information and Communication Technology Sector of the Goeldi Museum. 
 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
 
Figura 4. Network Attached Storage (NAS) de 96TB no acervo do Museu Goeldi 
 
Currently, the Linguistics Area digital archive contains records of 80 indigenous 
languages. Of these, 73 are completely digitized, catalogued and stored in the LAT software. 
The LAT files take up 2.49 TB of space; the temporal duration of these recordings is 1,561 
hours of audio and 474 hours of video. In addition to these files, the archive also contains 9TB 
of raw recordings, including High Definition video, which take up a lot of space. Edited works, 
mainly for community use, take up another 1.5 TB. Another 6 TB is occupied by photographs 
and loose files of the researchers. The metadata of the LAT files on the server can be found at 
http://arqling.museu-goeldi.br. The recordings are currently not available for download, 
pending reorganization of the archive and resolution of access issues. 
To contribute to the development of indigenous language documentation in Brazil, the 
linguists at the Goeldi disseminate, through intensive training, knowledge of the technology 
and methodology involved, including suggestions for equipment. This training is also carried 
out among indigenous groups. Moreover, the archive offers digitization and storage services 
for legacy recordings (see §5 below). For example, the Goeldi team is currently working with 
an anthropologist to digitize his collection of 115 cassette tapes (both sides) of two Nambikwara 
dialects. The recordings, some from the 1970s, include music, a dictionary, conversations, and 
minimal tone pairs. The recordings are being digitized and, in collaboration with the 
anthropologist, will soon be catalogued and deposited in the digital linguistic archive. He will 
receive copies in .mp3 format, which take up little space and can be returned to Nambikwara 
communities. Cassette tapes can be deposited in the archive or returned to the researcher. People 
interested in this service should contact the Goeldi Linguistics Area (linguistica@museu-
goeldi.br). 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
3.2. Other efforts and priorities for language archiving in Brazil 
 
Alongside the Goeldi Museum, few other Brazilian institutions are involved in 
archiving initiatives. Currently, the principal effort is based at the Museu do Índio in Rio de 
Janeiro, a component of the Fundação Nacional do Índio. Over time, this museum has 
systematically increased its infrastructure and has developed impressive digital storage and 
backup capacities. The Museu do Índio has also been conducting active projects to document 
indigenous languages and cultures, following the best international practices. Its digital archive 
contains approximately 10 TB of linguistic documentation, including the languages of 25 
indigenous groups. It also contains 9 TB of cultural documentation from 27 indigenous groups, 
which includes recordings of linguistic interest. Outputs of the ‘Indigenous Sonorities’ project 
(focusing on cultural preservation via audio documentation) for five indigenous groups occupy 
1.69 TB. The total content of the file occupies approximately 50 TB. Copies of all recordings 
are returned to the communities involved, but Internet access is still being resolved. 
Various well-organized linguistic documentation projects, led by Brazilian linguists, are 
ongoing and are producing significant amounts of recordings, steadily increasing the need for 
professional archiving. For example, the Documentation Center of the Federal University of 
Amapá in Oiapoque has documentation projects with the Karipuna and Galibi-Marworno 
(coordinated by Gelsama Mara Ferreira do Santos) and with the Palikur (coordinated by 
Elissandra Barros da Silva). Data is currently being stored on microcomputers and external hard 
drives. The project with the Galibi-Marworno has 13.5 GB of audio (.wav) and 403 GB of video 
(.mov, mp4), as well as 51 GB of photos and 15 GB of edited video. The Palikur project has 
20GB of audio, 6TB of video (.mp4) and over 100,000 photographs in RAW format, for a total 
of 10TB. 
 
Clearly, the demand for language documentation archives is growing in Brazil, as 
elsewhere, and is presently far above the current capacity. One possible solution to the need for 
more capacity is the creation of regional digital archives. These would not only increase the 
current capacity, but they would also have the advantage of relative proximity and visibility to 
the indigenous peoples of the region. This could facilitate both further recording and indigenous 
groups’ access to those recordings. A natural place for archives of this type is indigenous 
training programs at universities, for example at the Universidade de Amazonas, the 
Universidade Federal de Goiás, or the Universidade Federal do Amapá in Oiapoque. In these 
programs, indigenous students are trained in computer literacy while maintaining contact with 
their respective groups, thus facilitating a productive cooperation between the archive and the 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
groups in question. The infrastructure for an archive of this type can be bought at once or, as in 
the case of the Goeldi, built up, in stages, in tandem with research or documentation projects. 
The cost of a 48TB NAS (Network Attached Storage) was approximately R$20,000 in the 
middle of 2021 (with the dollar at R$5.80). For digital language documentation, a complete set 
of excellent portable semi-professional equipment (camcorder, tripod, digital audio recorder, 
laptop, three types of microphones, lamp, carrying case, batteries, cords, adapters) was 
approximately R$20,000. At least two kits would be needed to equip a regional documentation 
center and archive. In addition to infrastructure, training in documentation technology and 
methodology is required to ensure quality, which is always a challenge. One issue to be resolved 
is the need for an archiving software that is reasonably simple and user-friendly. 
 
Ultimately, the archiving options presented in this section represent different levels of 
capacity regarding the major goals of preservation, conservation, and accessibility, in keeping 
with the observations presented at the end of §2 above. While smaller-scale archiving initiatives 
such as those proposed here may not meet DELAMAN standards with respect to some of these 
goals, they are certainly a step in the right direction, and in some cases they may offer more 
options for accessibility even where they are less developed in their capacity for long-term 
preservation. Moreover, as noted above, researchers should be aware of the possibility of 
archiving both at a local or regional level and also in a higher-infrastructure archive. This 
possibility is illustrated by the Paresi and Enawene Nawe case studies described in §6 below. 
 
4. Archives and communities 
 
This section considers ways in which members of a language community can be 
involved in archival projects, and the ethical questions of informed consent and access that 
accompany their involvement. 
 
Community members may interact more or less directly with an archive. An example 
of quite direct interaction can be seen in the “Verdena Parker Collection of Hupa Sound 
Recordings and Films” (PARKER, n.d., held by California Language Archive). Verdena 
Parker, a native speaker of Hupa (Dene, aka Athabaskan; California), made sound recordings 
and films over many decades, culminating in her collaboration with linguists from the 
University of California, Berkeley on a documentation project, initiated in 2005 (see PARKER 
et al., 2005+). These recordings, archived in 2010, include texts, vocabulary, translations, and 
observations about life in Hoopa Valley, for use in revitalization programs.  
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
 
However, the vast majority of archival projects involve at least some speakers who do 
not interact directly with the archive, and in many cases may not have prior familiarity with 
archiving or what it entails. The “Kawahiva Language Documentation Archive” (DOS 
SANTOS, 2017+) is one example; this collection, developed on an ongoing basis, consists of 
audio and video recordings of stories, conversations, songs, elicitation, meetings, field notes, 
and photographs. Two speakers record, transcribe, and send files monthly for archiving, 
“creat[ing] the sentiment that the archive belongs to them as well” (DOS SANTOS, p.c.), and 
depositor Wesley dos Santos has also created a video to explain to community members how 
to access the materials via the California Language Archive. 
 
Whatever the affiliation of the person or people who lead a documentation and archiving 
initiative, they work under an ethical imperative to clearly communicate, explain, and obtain 
consent for these efforts from the speakers and other community members involved. Below, we 
explore these ethical requisites and offer some strategies to meet them (§4.1), illustrated via a 
case study from co-author Rosés Labrada’s work with the Mako people of Venezuela (§4.2). 
At the end of this section (§4.3), we consider strategies for enabling community access to 
archival materials. 
 
4.1. Ethics and informed consent 
 
Discussions of ethics and ethical best practices have figured prominently in the language 
documentation literature. In these discussions, particular attention has been paid to 
collaboration (GLENN, 2009; LEONARD and HAYNES, 2010), community involvement and 
engagement (YAMADA, 2007; CZAYKOWSKA-HIGGINS, 2009; SAPIÉN, 2018; 
BISCHOFF and JANY, 2018), and the applicability of ethical models to different parts of the 
world (DOBRIN, 2008; HOLTON, 2009; PÉREZ BÁEZ, ROGERS and ROSÉS LABRADA, 
2016). The intersection of archiving and ethics has also received considerable attention (e.g., 
Macri and Sarmento 2010 and Innes 2010, both of whom explored ethical issues related to 
archives). In these discussions, informed consent has played a key role, with multiple 
researchers questioning how ‘informed’ the consent really is (GRINEVALD, 2006; 
ROBINSON, 2010). An overview of some of the issues relating to informed consent may be 
found in Dwyer (2006, p. 43-48). 
 
Informed consent is a legal – at least in many places, including Brazil – and moral 
obligation. It is, therefore, essential that speakers/signers understand what their participation 
entails and, crucially, what the consequences of digital archiving really are. One potential 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
challenge to informed consent with respect to archiving is that of familiarity with archives and 
the Internet – and in some instances, computers – on the part of the community and/or the 
speakers. As Robinson (2010, p. 189) asks, “can we obtain truly informed consent [for 
archiving] if the consultant and the community have never seen a computer or heard of an 
archive or the Internet?”. There are two additional issues here. Firstly, research is by default 
open-ended. We generally gather a corpus based on particular research questions but those 
questions, or rather the answers to them, may lead to new questions. Thus, when you gather 
consent at the beginning of a project, if the goals of the project change or new research questions 
arise, does the initial consent hold? This is particularly difficult to anticipate with archived data, 
which as we will see below can be reused by others. Secondly, the descendants and 
communities of tomorrow may need these materials for revitalization purposes, as described 
for example in Bomfim (2017). In what follows, we exemplify these issues and propose one 
approach, among many possible ones, to address some of these concerns. 
 
4.2. Case study: Explaining archiving to community members 
 
This case study reflects on the experience of co-author Rosés Labrada in explaining 
archiving to members of the Mako communities along the Ventuari River in Venezuela during 
his doctoral project (2012-2015) focused on the documentation and description of Mako, a Jodï-
Sáliban language (ROSÉS LABRADA, 2015). 
 
In 2011, Rosés Labrada undertook a trip to several Mako communities along the 
Ventuari River and its tributaries in order to gather community consent for the project as a 
whole. As part of this process and attending to local protocols, village meetings in several 
communities were held, which resulted in an invitation to return to work in two communities: 
Arena Blanca and San José de Yureva. However, no data were collected on that first trip. The 
documentation project thus started in July 2012, and Arena Blanca was selected as the site of 
the first field stay due to its composition as a largely homogenous Mako-speaking community.10 
 
Initial preparation for a community-wide discussion about ethics and informed consent 
took place on July 14, 2012 in a meeting with two community members who were also the 
school teachers in Arena Blanca at the time and who had agreed to act as translators for the 
meeting. A clear outcome of the meeting with the schoolteachers was the realization that the 
concept of archiving was likely to be difficult for the outside linguist to explain in ways that 
 
10 San José de Yureva is a mixed Mako-Piaroa community where both Mako and Piaroa are spoken. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
would be clearly understood due to the complexity of some of the concepts and technicalities 
behind them. Of significant concern was the fact that, at the time, there was no connectivity for 
the Internet or phones, there were no computers in the community, and both the teachers had 
limited experience with this technology. 
 
The community-wide meeting on July 15 was well attended by many community adults, 
who engaged in discussion of the project and potential ethical issues posed by recording and 
archiving audiovisual materials. Because this was a meeting to seek permission to record, the 
meeting itself was not recorded. However, the permission seeking process advanced 
significantly during this meeting: 
1. recording with both video and audio was accepted; 
2. taking pictures was also accepted but with the caveat that pictures of unclothed children 
or topless women were to be avoided as the community had abandoned those traditional 
practices; 
3. keeping the data beyond the duration of the project and sharing it outside the community 
was also accepted. 
Nevertheless, Rosés Labrada sensed that the concept of archiving remained “fuzzy”, 
particularly in two areas: (1) the implications of the online sharing of materials that identify 
specific individuals and (2) the options for sharing or restricting access to those materials or the 
names of the individuals. Thus, the linguist took steps to make sure that the community really 
understood what was involved in the archiving process. His goal was to show them what the 
collection in the archive would look like, but the challenge came from the lack of Internet access 
in the community. 
The solution adopted was to take screenshots of an initial archival deposit to show what 
the archive’s website looked like and what it would be like to navigate through it. In preparation, 
Rosés Labrada and one of the schoolteachers visited the AILLA and ELAR websites while in 
Puerto Ayacucho, the capital of Amazonas state, and the schoolteacher agreed to deposit one 
of his recorded stories to start a collection that was to be double-archived in both archives.11 
After the deposit of a folder with all the items corresponding to one single story, both archives 
supplied screenshots of what the collection and the deposit looked like. 
 
11 Both AILLA and ELAR initially agreed to host the data stemming from the research project. However, both 
archives moved later to a model that avoids “double-archiving” (i.e., duplication of the same collections in multiple 
DELAMAN repositories), as that means twice the amount of required digital storage space. The Mako collection 
is now hosted by ELAR (http://hdl.handle.net/2196/6bed9c49-c2dd-446d-b692-53c24cfbc916) and the initial 
deposit in the AILLA website (https://ailla.utexas.org/es/islandora/object/ailla%3A124494) redirects the visitor to 
the ELAR website. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
A second community-wide meeting was held on November 4, 2012 in Arena Blanca 
after Rosés Labrada’s return with these screenshots. The discussion that ensued was better 
informed in a number of aspects. First, one request was that originals stay in the community. 
This request allowed the linguist to provide further explanation about the context of digital 
documentation: that specific recordings were born digital, that originals and copies could be 
identical, and that copies could be easily made—which would not necessarily have been the 
case if we had recorded directly on cassettes or CDs/DVDs, which the community was more 
familiar with.  
A second issue that came up was the question of access for community members and a 
distinction between those “who know” – meaning those who know how to use computers and 
the Internet – versus those “who don’t know.” The general consensus was that those who knew 
could potentially go to the Internet and use these archived materials but that for those who did 
not know, making copies in DVDs and CDs was needed. A third issue concerned the content 
of the recordings themselves; a community member expressed a preoccupation regarding 
recordings that may contain crude jokes or curse words and who could listen. For these, it did 
not seem to be a problem that people in other parts of the world could listen to these recordings. 
Rather, this particular community member was concerned about the potential reactions of Mako 
people from other nearby villages who might listen and not understand that these jokes were 
truly meant in jest. Finally, there was discussion of videos of traditional activities as being 
harmless, when compared to some other videos that the community was aware of, such as 
violent movies. This provided an opportunity to explain further that individual speakers had 
agency to restrict access both at the time of recording but also into the future, and that specific 
access provisions could be enabled and changed at any time in the future. Overall, this 
discussion reassured Rosés Labrada that community members in Arena Blanca had a clearer 
understanding – when compared to the initial meeting in July 2012 – of some of the ethical 
issues around informed consent, archiving and access. 
 
This small case study illustrates three main points: 1) it is crucial that we explain 
archiving in ways that communities and individual participants can understand; 2) communities 
and participants should be able to revisit their decisions; and 3) we should try to anticipate 
future uses of the materials and make provisions where possible, while being fully aware that 
we cannot foresee the future. Ultimately, ethical choices are not necessarily defined in black 
and white, and what works in one specific context may not necessarily work in another 
(HOLTON, 2009; GASSER, 2017). However, as long as we aim to uphold principles of respect, 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
reciprocity, responsibility, and relationships, as advocated by Rice (2006), we should be able 
to avoid some of the potential ethical pitfalls that could arise as part of the archiving process. 
 
4.3. Enabling community access to archival materials 
 
As the Mako case illustrates, having and maintaining access to language documentation 
materials tends to be a key priority for communities, not only for those people who are directly 
involved in documentation, but also – and sometimes even more so – for their descendants (e.g., 
DWYER, 2006, p. 59; VAPNARSKY, 2020; R. MILLER, 2021). Yet effectively returning 
language documentation materials to communities can be a complex and multi-stage process, 
and must take into account the different capacities community members have to access these 
materials. These capacities may be constrained not only by a lack of access to the internet, 
through which archived materials in many digital repositories can be viewed and downloaded, 
but also by the skills required for navigating online interfaces (as well as the languages in which 
these interfaces might be presented, such as English) and by basic computer literacy. For 
members of some communities, access even to static technologies such as CD and DVD players 
may be limited, as may be the capacity to read printed materials in the community language (or 
otherwise).  
 
Enabling access may require creative solutions. One model that has met with 
considerable success is the “distributed digital audiovisual archive” or “jukebox archive” 
(BARWICK, 2004; BARWICK et al., 2005; O’MEARA and GONZÁLEZ GUADARRAMA, 
2016). This initiative, originally piloted in Australia, involves setting up a computer in a 
community center or other neutral location where community members can easily access it, and 
does not require a connection to the internet. The jukebox computer contains language 
documentation materials – audio and video recordings, as well as (potentially) transcriptions, 
photographs, etc. – in easily movable file formats (such as .mp3), as well as the capacity to burn 
CDs/DVDs and to download files onto a flash drive, phone, or .mp3 player. Community 
members can thus take copies of materials home with them, and can also add to the jukebox by 
uploading their own. Another useful model relies on a local wifi transmitter called a ‘Raspberry 
Pi’, which is effective in contexts where people have smartphones and the associated skills, but 
have limited or no computer literacy (e.g. THIEBERGER, 2019). 
 
Of course, ethical considerations are relevant to all these initiatives – and not only to 
the process of enabling and maintaining access to documentary materials, but also in 
considering how and whether community members wish to limit their access and use (see the 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
sections above; also MACRI and SARMENTO, 2010; DEBENPORT, 2010). Some recorded 
material may be viewed as potentially damaging, dangerous, offensive, or otherwise private, 
and understandings of who should or should not have access to what material may involve 
complex and intersecting categories, associated with particular conceptions of outsider/insider, 
gender, clan, neighbor, relative, etc. – which may be much more complex than the blanket term 
‘community’ implies. As pointed out above, decisions about access, like other facets of 
documentation and archiving, must be continually informed by ethical principles. 
 
5. Legacy materials and the reach of archives 
 
Archives have tended to increase their holdings with the proactive donations of living 
individuals (often academic researchers), or with bequeathments from the estates of deceased 
individuals. However, the reach of archives can be broadened and enriched beyond this model 
in a number of ways. As is becoming more common, speakers and other indigenous 
collaborators can contribute directly, as well as indirectly, to the archival process, as we 
addressed in §4. Moreover, as we explore here, researchers, community members, and archive 
staff can be proactive in locating and preserving legacy materials, a process that itself can 
involve collaboration among many stakeholders. In this section, we consider practical 
considerations in locating and archiving legacy materials, that is, written or audiovisual 
materials collected in the past, usually before digital recording and archiving methods were 
available (§5.1) and in making use of them (§5.2). 
 
5.1. Valuing and archiving legacy materials  
 
Researchers who work or have worked with speakers of indigenous languages are often 
in personal possession of rich documentary collections including field notes, sound recordings, 
photographs, and film, which may be stored in their offices or homes in sub-optimal or risky 
conditions (e.g., damage from humidity, insects, flooding). These legacy materials – even when 
they are not especially numerous – are of high linguistic, cultural, historical, and personal value 
for individuals and larger groups. For less well documented languages, legacy materials may 
constitute the only early records of language use, to say nothing of the other aspects of life that 
they often capture. Unlike widely spoken languages such as Portuguese, for which historical 
records are readily at hand, historical records of many indigenous languages often persist only 
by way of diligent efforts to archive legacy materials. As Austin (2017, p. 23, emphasis added) 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
stresses, “For projects interested in documenting, describing or revitalizing languages, 
especially endangered languages, historically existing materials (whether digital or analog) like 
tape recordings made in earlier times or written materials collected years or even centuries ago 
may exist and may represent important sources of information, indeed, in some cases, the only 
information available.” Linguists have a professional responsibility to be aware of the existence 
of relevant legacy materials, and, when possible, work toward preserving them for and in 
collaboration with communities, for linguistics and related disciplines, and for posterity 
generally. This allows for the subsequent philological analysis of the documentary record, 
“recogniz[ing] the documentary filiation which characterizes all linguistic data as they are 
successively recorded, interpreted, and analyzed” (GODDARD, 1973, p. 727). At the same 
time, linguists have a responsibility to ensure that their engagement with legacy materials is 
carried out in an ethical fashion (O’MEARA and GOOD, 2010; see also §4 above).  
 
The preservation of legacy materials involves certain key steps: locating the materials; 
appraising their physical condition; organizing them in a basic way; transporting them to an 
archive or other (temporary) safe location; carrying out any necessary conservation 
remediation; cataloging them; and, ideally, digitizing them (perhaps not necessarily in this 
order). Locating legacy materials is often one of the more difficult steps, requiring either 
inadvertently being made aware of their existence and location, or a good deal of sleuthing. In 
general, locating legacy materials is made easier by having a deep familiarity with the histories 
of research and other activities such as exploration in particular regions across many disciplines. 
More concretely, one should pay attention to descriptions, often in the methodology or similar 
section, of early publications (and unpublished works, when available). 
For example, the late anthropologist Gerald Weiss (see O’HAGAN, 2021 for 
background), in a section of his PhD dissertation titled “Design and Method,” had the following 
to say about the output of his fieldwork in Ashaninka communities along the Tambo River of 
Peru from 1961 to 1964 (WEISS, 1969, p. 6). 
 
The techniques employed in the field for obtaining information were standard, 
adjusted only to the particular requirements of the information being gathered. A 
journal was kept; temperature, humidity and precipitation readings were recorded 
daily in camp; information obtained from observation and interrogation were 
accumulated on four-by-six slips or some other convenient form – in duplicate, with 
date, place and informant’s name indicated on each slip; specimens, photographs, and 
tape recordings were taken of everything possible. 
 
 
Author O’Hagan was familiar with Weiss’s work in the context of his own fieldwork 
with speakers of the related Caquinte language, but in previous readings of his dissertation had 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
skipped over the section “Design and Method.” From it, however, we learn of the existence – 
at least at a certain point in time – of field notes, index cards (cf. slips), biological specimens, 
photographs, and sound recordings. Gerald Weiss became a professor of anthropology at 
Florida Atlantic University; a Google search in March 2021 revealed that he was still affiliated 
with that institution as an emeritus professor. Furthermore, a phone call at the same time 
revealed that all the above-listed materials – and more from postdoctoral research – were kept 
at his home in Florida (see ANWAR, 2021 for more details). 
 
The basic organization of legacy materials can be difficult if the objects in question 
(e.g., field notes, tapes) have little metadata associated with them, and if specialists who might 
be able to read or understand the spoken version of a particular language cannot be consulted. 
Additionally, some objects may be in a format that is not easily accessed, for example, as is 
often the case with the analog reel-to-reel tapes that were commonplace from the 1950s to the 
1970s, an especially valuable period in the documentation of many languages. Depending on 
the specific situation, at this juncture it may be beneficial to collaborate with community 
members who can assist in the interpretation of the materials, or to first have them digitized, 
either by an external professional audio technician12 or by an archive as part of a donation. 
Regardless, the main goal of this step of organization is to produce a basic inventory of objects 
(how many notebooks, tapes, etc.) before they are transported, so that there is a record that can 
be corroborated to ensure that all the materials arrive at their intended destination. If metadata 
is lacking, other descriptions of the physical objects can be given (e.g., “two tapes with red 
design on cover”). 
 
The goal in the transportation of legacy materials is for the materials to be sent to a 
location that either (on a temporary basis) has relatively better storage conditions (e.g., one that 
is less humid) or facilitates the transfer of them to an archive, if not to an archive directly. The 
moment of transportation can be one of the most perilous for archival materials. Ideally, 
especially delicate materials like tapes can be transported personally, for example, in carry-on 
luggage.13 For other materials, it is important to keep them dry (e.g., with plastic coverings) and 
separate from others that might damage them. If materials are to be shipped, make sure to use 
high-quality cardboard boxes (with ample tape and bubble wrap), and, when financially 
possible, opt for airmail over ground transportation, as this usually involves less repeated 
 
12 Older recording studios in urban areas often have the equipment and expertise to do such digitization.There are 
a number of software programs to digitize analog sound, such as Audacity or Sound Forge. If you cannot operate 
these and you have sufficient funding, you can consult a professional. 
13 At all costs, avoid exposure to magnets, which can severely damage analog tapes. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
handling of boxes. In general, at this stage it is best to be in contact with an archive that can 
provide you with additional guidance. Archives will also be the best informed to advise you on 
cataloging and digitization. We emphasize that digitization of analog sound recordings and film 
is in most situations relatively urgent, as the original tape degrades over time, and in most 
situations the prior storage conditions of the materials are not at an archival standard. Humidity 
and water damage are especially common. 
 
5.2. Utilizing legacy materials 
 
Legacy materials often preserve the voices and knowledge of people who preceded other 
documentation projects by many decades, and who in some cases represent the last first-
language speakers or semi-speakers. In such cases, legacy materials may be a key source of 
information for community efforts in language revitalization and in maintaining or reclaiming 
cultural heritage, as well as for scholars’ efforts to understand the breadth and depth of human 
expression.  
 
Once materials have been archived, many years may pass before they are utilized by 
others. For example, linguist Catherine Callaghan (1931-2019) made a series of recordings of 
Sarah Ballard speaking Bodega Miwok (Miwokan; California) in 1960, while the former was a 
graduate student in linguistics at the University of California, Berkeley (PhD, 1963). She 
donated these and other recordings to the California Language Archive14 in 1979 (BALLARD 
and CALLAGHAN, n.d.). Forty years later, in 2019, linguist Andrew Cowell (Berkeley PhD 
in 1993) made time-aligned transcriptions of these recordings in ELAN, which he archived with 
the same repository (COWELL, 2019+).15 The two collections are linked in the archive’s digital 
catalog, and so can easily be related to each other when consulting one or the other. Similarly, 
linguist Gladwyn Kingsley Noble, Jr. (1923-1994) made recordings of speakers of Wapishana 
and Atorai (Arawak; Brazil, Guyana) during a single field trip to Guyana in 1965. After 
wending their way through the hands of different academics, the 13 tapes were donated to the 
California Language Archive around 2006 by Manjari Ohala (see GEORGE et al., 1965). The 
recordings of Atorai, formerly thought to no longer have any first-language speakers, were 
utilized for a preliminary phonological description of the language by O’Hagan (2018), which 
was elaborated on by E. Miller (2021) as part of an undergraduate honors thesis. In 2021, the 
 
14 At the time, the California Language Archive (CLA) was known as the Survey of California Indian Languages. 
15 In the model of incremental archiving, in 2021 Cowell added time-aligned transcriptions of Richard Applegate’s 
recordings of Sarah Ballard (Ballard and Applegate 1974). 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
texts included in the recordings were translated by remaining speakers now resident in 
Wapishana communities, and may serve as a basis for a workshop dedicated to Atorai language 
later in 2022 (K. RYBKA, p.c.). 
 
Finally, we stress that legacy materials can be utilized on an ongoing basis, and that 
usage requires interpretation – a creative process of understanding of “what those materials 
meant to their creators, what new meanings they might take on in the context in which they are 
being used, and what roles [contemporary actors] themselves as persons might play in the 
materials’ circulation and reception” (DOBRIN and SCHWARTZ, 2021, p. 23). One especially 
productive example of ongoing work with legacy materials is the biennial Breath of Life 
Archival Institute for Indigenous California Languages (see GEHR, 2013) held at the 
University of California, Berkeley, organized by the Advocates for Indigenous California 
Language Survival (AICLS) in conjunction with the Survey of California and Other Indian 
Languages, which houses the California Language Archive. The Institute brings indigenous 
people to the Berkeley campus to collaborate with volunteer linguists in the interpretation of 
archival materials, many of which date back to the early 20th century. This model has been 
successfully expanded to other locales (BALDWIN, PÉREZ BÁEZ and HINTON, 2018) and 
it may be fruitful to consider whether a similar initiative in Brazil could increase the 
accessibility of existing language materials. 
 
6. Case studies: Documentation and archiving of the Paresi-Haliti and Enawene Nawe 
languages 
 
This section offers a pair of case studies illustrating language documentation and 
archiving in Brazil, through projects carried out in collaboration with the Paresi-Haliti and 
Enawene Nawe peoples and led by Ana Paula Brandão. After a brief introduction to these two 
languages, we describe the documentation projects (§6.1), and the resulting archival collections 
(§6.2). 
Paresi (Glottocode pare1272, latitude -14.59 and longitude -57.41) is an indigenous 
language spoken by a people of the same name, whose population of approximately 3000 is 
distributed in several communities in the State of Mato Grosso, near the city of Cuiabá, on the 
tributaries of the Juruena River. The Enawene Nawe language (Glottolog code enaw1238, 
latitude -12.43 and longitude -58.98) is spoken by a smaller group of approximately 1000 
people, who live in two communities (Halataikwa and Kolinakwa), in an Indigenous Territory 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
located near the cities of Juína, in the State of Mato Grosso, and Vilhena, in the State of 
Rondônia. 
Both languages belong to the Arawakan family (PAYNE, 1991; AIKHENVALD, 1999; 
RAMIREZ, 2001). Brandão, Carvalho and Pereira (2018) and Pereira (2018) present evidence 
that Enawene Nawe (hereinafter EN) and Paresi are very closely related, and together with the 
Saraveka language form a subgroup, which they term Juruena. In previous classifications of the 
Arawak family, only Fabre (2005) suggested a proximity between Paresi and Enenawe Nawe, 
whereas Payne (1991) grouped Paresi together with Waurá in a Central group, and Aikhenvald 
(1999) likewise classified Paresi together with the Xingu languages in a ‘Paresi-Xingu’ branch. 
Considerable documentation and description now exists for the Paresi language. Ana 
Paula Brandão and Glauber Silva independently documented the language over several years. 
Among the main descriptive works for Paresi are Silva (2009, 2013) and Brandão (2010, 2014). 
Work with EN is quite recent, on the other hand; the only known descriptive works are Rezende 
(2003, 2013),16 Brandão and Reis (2020), Reis (2020). In 2005, the project ‘Sketch grammar, 
texts, and dictionary of Enawene Nawe (Arawak, Brazil)’ was funded by the Endangered 
Languages Documentation Program (ELDP), but unfortunately the project was not completed. 
In 2019, Brandão received funding from the ELDP, through the Federal University of Pará, for 
the project ‘Documentation of the Enawene Nawe language’.  
 
6.1. The documentation projects 
 
The Paresi language documentation project started in 2006 and was developed via 
Brandão’s doctoral and postdoctoral research on the language. The EN language documentation 
project began in May 2019, with completion expected at the end of 2022. The goals of both 
projects were to organize a large corpus of audio and video recordings, spanning a variety of 
linguistic genres, and transcribed in the relevant indigenous language and translated into 
Portuguese. 
The documentation of Paresi was initiated at the request of the Rio Formoso community, 
who were interested in recording their traditional culture. In the EN Halataikwa community, we 
also got in touch with a speaker of the language who invited us to visit them and present the 
project proposal to them. We obtained permission from the communities to record material 
 
16 Rezende (2013), a morphosyntactic description of the language, is not available to the academic community or 
to the community of speakers. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
within a non-profit model. Communities benefited from the production of DVDs, CDs and USB 
drives for accessing traditional stories and songs, and from the training of indigenous teachers 
in linguistic documentation. The Paresi material also served as a basis for the elaboration of a 
reference grammar of the language, which was defended as a doctoral thesis (BRANDÃO, 
2014). 
The project participants included indigenous teachers and elders who were 
knowledgeable about traditional culture. Some teachers worked with recording, and others with 
transcription, translation, and metadata organization. One of the Paresi participants also worked 
with video editing. A key Paresi collaborator, Jurandir Zezokiware, participated in the 
documentation project with the EN community; his presence was very important in establishing 
a relationship of trust with the EN. He assisted during trainings and collected linguistic data. 
The project also involved UFPA undergraduate students, who visited the Paresi and Enawene 
Nawe communities to learn about fieldwork.  
 
Both projects allowed for high quality equipment to be purchased for the Paresi and 
Enawene Nawe via financial support from the ELDP/SOAS. This equipment included a Zoom 
digital recorder, Shure head microphones, a digital video camera, an external microphone for 
the camcorder, a tripod, and other materials. Various cultural and speech events were 
documented throughout the projects. The Paresi communities selected traditional stories, songs, 
blessings, traditional festivals, indigenous games, etc. for documentation, and we also recorded 
different dialects or varieties of the Paresi language. The EN preferred to focus on recording 
traditional stories (e.g. their origin story, the account of the origin of cassava, a story about 
spirits, and others). More information about the two projects is provided in Brandão and 
Zezokiware (2018). 
 
 
Figure 5. Paresi men wearing traditional clothing (PAB-200712-AP-RC-PontePedra80.JPG, photograph: Rose 
Costa); Enawene Nawe telling stories (UNK-20190500-AP-treinamentos-136.jpg, photograph: Ana Paula 
Brandão) 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
6.2. The Paresi and Enawene Nawe archival collections 
 
 
The primary data – audio and video recordings – were recorded in .WAV and .MTS 
formats, respectively. Each session was recorded in audio and video. Later, the .MTS files were 
converted to .MP4 for archiving, to yield a more compact format for storage. The file names 
begin with the ISO code for the language (PAB for Paresi and UNK for EN), followed by the 
recording date (in YYYY/MM/DD format), the abbreviations of the names of the person who 
recorded and of the primary speaker, and the keyword of the session in which the file is 
included; for example: UNK-20200114-WE-YI-Kolito.MTS. These documentation projects 
generated digital collections involving more than 150 hours of Paresi recordings and 37 hours 
of Enawene Nawe recordings, which are organized into seven categories, as illustrated in Table 
1. 
 
Categories 
Paresi 
Enawene 
Nawe 
Daily activities 
9h 
30 min 
Ritual activities 
13h 
0 
General elicitation 
36h 
30 min 
Lexical elicitation 
10h 
4h 
Music 
15h 
1h 
Traditional stories 
38h 
24h 
Non-traditional stories 
30h 
7h 
Total 
150h 
37h 
Table 1. Paresi and Enawene Nawe digital recording 
 
 
The secondary data produced in these projects include annotations and metadata 
associated with the recordings. Annotations, consisting of transcriptions and translations into 
Portuguese, were made using the ELAN program (EUDICO Linguistic Annotator 2020) and 
Word. Lexicons for both languages were also developed, and several Paresi texts were 
interlinearized using the FLEx program (FieldWorks Language Explorer 2019) according to 
the analysis presented in the reference grammar. The transcriptions and translations of the texts 
were made by the speakers. Most of the transcriptions were produced during the period when 
the lead researcher was not in the communities and, in the case of Paresi, they were later 
reviewed with the speakers. Paresi speakers received training in the use of ELAN, while EN 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
speakers had little interaction with this program and preferred to transcribe in Word using a 
computer or cell phone. We are still organizing the notes from the EN recordings, such that all 
material will be transferred to ELAN and can later be published in a digital collection. 
 
 
Files in ELAN have at least three lines of annotations: the transcription, the translation, 
and the notes. More detailed information about the glosses of Paresi or EN morphemes (i.e. the 
interlinearization) is organized in the FLEx program, as it allows automatic insertion of glosses 
(once they are already entered in the database), unlike ELAN. Neither language has an 
established orthography that is used consistently in indigenous schools. Therefore, 
transcriptions were made in the orthographies that the speakers know and, in the case of Paresi, 
they were systematized according to the orthography that Brandão proposed for the language.
 
 
 
The metadata were initially organized in an Excel spreadsheet, then entered into the 
Lameta program (HALTON et al., 2021). Each session groups together an audio file, video file, 
and annotation in ELAN (.EAF format) or elicitations in PDF. IMDI files (ISLE Metadata 
Initiative) were also created for each session, and contain information about the recordings, 
such as the ‘actors’ (people involved), subject, content description, and keywords. There are 
also sets of photographs organized into the following categories: community, craft, school, 
daily life, researchers, training, people, and work. 
 
 
All data from the Paresi project are stored in the archive of the Museu Paraense Emílio 
Goeldi, but are not yet available to the public. Twenty hours of material collected during the 
period of financial support from ELDP (2011-2012) were also stored in the archive associated 
with this institution, the Endangered Language Archive (ELAR).17 Another thirty hours are 
stored at the Archive of the Indigenous Languages of the Americas (AILLA),18 based at the 
University of Texas at Austin, with some materials available online. Part of the material 
collected in the Enawene Nawe project was organized in ELAR19 and will also be made 
available in the Goeldi archive. 
 
 
The archives referenced here employ a set of graded access codes, which indicate the 
different levels of access available for different files. ELAR has the following codes: a) O for 
free access, b) U for materials that can be accessed by creating an account in the collection; and 
c) S for materials that are restricted and can only be accessed with the depositor's permission. 
Files marked with the access code S may contain personal or sensitive information about the 
 
17 Paresi-Haliti collection at ELAR: http://hdl.handle.net/2196/00-0000-0000-000E-2C87-4  
18 Paresi-Haliti collection at AILLA: https://ailla.utexas.org/islandora/object/ailla:254756  
19 Enawene Nawe collection at ELAR: http://hdl.handle.net/2196/00-0000-0000-0012-D797-0  
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
speakers, such as conversations and life stories, or may be currently under analysis by the 
depositor. Materials in the AILLA collection have similar access levels, indicated by numbers 
instead of letters. Some archives require users to complete a free registration on the website 
before any materials may be accessed. 
 
These archives are available in English (ELAR) or in English and Spanish (AILLA), 
but they do not yet have access information in Portuguese,20 which makes it more difficult for 
Paresi and Enenawe Nawe people to access them. In the future, we intend to make these 
collections available in regional digital archives near the communities, potentially housed in 
universities (e.g. the Federal University of Mato Grosso [UFMT]), intercultural colleges, and/or 
indigenous schools. Speakers could thereby have physical access to the server where the 
materials are stored, as well as easier access via the internet. 
 
To conclude this section, the two documentation projects presented here have enabled 
the creation of Paresi and Enenawe Nawe archival collections, which are available both to the 
academic community and to indigenous community members. In the context of the Covid-19 
virus pandemic, archival collections such as these have been particularly useful for researchers 
who were unable to visit indigenous communities. Importantly, these collections are also a way 
of safeguarding traditional knowledge, as has been made even more urgent through the loss of 
many indigenous elders during the Covid-19 pandemic. It is crucial that language 
documentation materials that have not yet been deposited in archives be archived to ensure their 
long-term preservation. An important next step is to make these collections increasingly 
accessible to indigenous peoples in Brazil. In this way, indigenous teachers will be able to use 
the materials in community classrooms and for academic work within indigenous colleges. 
 
 
7. Conclusion 
 
Brazil and its neighboring regions are home to some of the highest levels of linguistic 
diversity known around the world. Some 300 indigenous languages are spoken in South 
America, and more than half this number within Brazil (MOORE, 2007; GALUCIO, MOORE 
and VAN DER VOORT, 2018, p. 195) – a fact celebrated by UNESCO’s International Decade 
of Indigenous Languages, of which the inception coincides with the writing of this article. Yet 
this wealth of languages represents just a fraction of the number that must have existed in South 
America on the eve of European contact, and the processes of language shift and loss have 
 
20 However, a Portuguese language interface is planned for AILLA, to be available soon. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
continued through the present day. Nearly 80 of the remaining 300 languages are now critically 
endangered (MOORE, 2007). The loss of indigenous languages in Brazil continues in spite of 
such initiatives as the Decreto n. 7.387 in 2010, which instituted the National Inventory of 
Linguistic Diversity (INDL), a government program to survey languages and declare them to 
be immaterial cultural patrimony (GALUCIO, MOORE and VAN DER VOORT, 2018). Even 
today, the great majority of Brazilian and other South American indigenous languages lack 
substantial description and documentation. Perhaps half have even a minimal record in archives.  
 
As this article has explored, archiving is an essential component of language 
documentation. It is only through archiving, and via well-maintained digital repositories with 
adequate infrastructure and institutional commitment, that documentary materials are reliably 
preserved and made accessible for the long term. Fortunately, the number of robust 
documentation projects and archival collections has been growing rapidly in the last few 
decades, as exemplified by the Paresi and Enawene Nawe projects described in the final section 
of this article (see also MOORE and GALUCIO, 2016). But we must build our participation 
and investment in archiving if we are to maintain the outcomes of this documentary work. As 
we discuss here, this means contributing to, supporting, and expanding archiving initiatives on 
all levels – regional and national initiatives like the Museu Goeldi in Brazil, and archives with 
international scope such as AILLA. It also means supporting and expanding the possibilities 
for speaker and heritage communities to access these materials, both through, by, and in 
collaboration with archives. As linguists, we have a social and academic responsibility to 
archive the documentary materials that we produce, to support initiatives to archive legacy 
materials, to make materials as accessible as possible, and to work closely with communities to 
ensure an ethical process. 
 
The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the urgency of these endeavors. Tragically, 
communities are losing elders, and languages are losing speakers. Documentary archives help 
to preserve their knowledge for the generations to come, and make it accessible to community 
members, scholars, and others into the future. Archives open new possibilities for research 
when fieldwork is impossible, offering alternative sources of data and analysis, and new 
pathways for investigation. And archives can provide key resources for communities who wish 
to revitalize, maintain, or simply remember their linguistic and cultural heritage. 
 
 
 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 
 
Competing interests 
The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
 
Link to Preprint  
https://preprints.scielo.org/index.php/scielo/preprint/view/4755 
 
Research Preregistration and Standards 
The authors confirm that they have reviewed the standards for research as registered in the 
Equator Network. The overview nature of this article does not constitute research on humans 
or animals. Since no primary research was done for this article, no preregistration in an 
independent, institutional registry was necessary. Prior ethics approvals were obtained for the 
studies referenced in this article, but no distinct ethics review for the work represented here was 
necessary. 
 
Data Accessibility Statement  
This article represents an overview study with no project-specific primary data. DOI links to 
relevant archival content have been included throughout the text where relevant. 
 
Acknowledgements 
We thank the organizers of Abralin ao Vivo for the opportunity to participate in their online 
forum (July 11, 2020). We would also like to thank the indigenous community members who 
have participated in the various projects cited here. While this study is an overview and did not 
receive project-specific funding, we are grateful to the entities that have generously supported 
the work that is reflected in the archival collections mentioned here. Rosés Labrada's doctoral 
project, reported on in Section 4, was funded by Canada's Social Sciences and Humanities 
Research Council (SSHRC) via a Vanier Canada Graduate Scholarship [Award No. 770-2012-
0151]. Ana Paula Brandão’s work on Paresi-Haliti and Enenawe-Nawe, reported on in Section 
6, were funded by the National Science Foundation (BCS 1123943) and the Endangered 
Languages Documentation Programme (IGS0160, IPF0280). 
 
 
References 
 
AIKHENVALD, Alexandra. 1999. The Arawak language family. In: R. M. W. Dixon & A. Y. 
Aikhenvald (orgs.). The Amazonian languages. p. 65-106. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.   
 
ANWAR, Yasmin. Chance phone call keeps alive scholar’s remarkable Amazonian legacy. In: 
Berkeley News, May 24, 2021.  
https://news.berkeley.edu/2021/05/24/chance-phone-call-keeps-alive-scholars-remarkable-
amazonian-legacy/.   
 
AUSTIN, Peter K. Language Documentation & Legacy Text Materials. Asian and African 
Languages and Linguistics. n. 11. p. 23-44. 2017. 
 
BALDWIN, Daryl; PÉREZ BÁEZ, Gabriela; HINTON, Leanne. The Breath of Life Workshops 
and Institutes. In: HINTON, Leanne;  HUSS, Leena; ROCHE, Gerald (orgs.). The Routledge 
Handbook of Language Revitalization, 1ed. , p. 188-196. London: Routledge, 2018. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
 
BALLARD, Sarah; APPLEGATE, Richard B. Bodega Miwok Sound Recordings 2014-05, 
California Language Archive, Survey of California and Other Indian Languages, University of 
California, Berkeley, 1974. http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.7297/X2QN64XN. 
 
BALLARD, Sarah; CALLAGHAN, Catherine A. n.d. The Catherine A. Callaghan 
Collection of Bodega Miwok Sound Recordings, LA 6, California Language Archive, Survey 
of California and Other Indian Languages, University of California, Berkeley, 
http://cla.berkeley.edu/collection/10086. 
 
BARWICK, Linda. Turning It All Upside Down…Imagining a Distributed Digital Audiovisual 
Archive. Literary and Linguistic Computing  Volume 19, N. 3, Setembro de  2004, p. 253–
263. https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/19.3.253. 
 
BARWICK, Linda; MARETT, Allan; WALSH, Michael; REID, Nicholas; FORD, Lysbeth. 
Communities of Interest: Issues in Establishing a Digital Resource on Murrinh-Patha Song at 
Wadeye (Port Keats), NT. Literary and Linguistic Computing Volume 20, N. 4, Novembro 
de 2005, p. 383–397. https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqi048. 
 
BEREZ-KROEKER, Andrea L.; GAWNE, Lauren; KUNG, Susan Smythe; KELLY, Barbara 
F.; HESTON, Tyler; HOLTON, Gary; PULSIFER, Peter; BEAVER, David I.; CHELLIAH, 
Shobhana; DUBINSKY, Stanley; MEIER, Richard P.; THIEBERGER, Nick; RICE, Keren; 
WOODBURY, Anthony C. Reproducible research in linguistics: A position statement on data 
citation and attribution in our field. Linguistics. vol. 56, no. 1, 2018, pp. 1-18. 
https://doi.org/10.1515/ling-2017-0032. 
BEREZ-KROEKER, Andrea L.; HENKE, Ryan. Language Archiving. In: REHG, Kenneth L.; 
CAMPBELL, Lyle (orgs.) The Oxford Handbook of Endangered Languages. pp. 347–69. 
Oxford: 
Oxford 
University 
Press, 
2018. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780190610029.013.18. 
 
BISCHOFF, Shannon T.; JANY, Carmen (orgs.). Insights from Practices in Community-
Based Research: From Theory to Practice around the Globe. Berlin & Boston: De Gruyter 
Mouton, 2018. https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110527018. 
 
BOMFIM, Anari Braz. Patxohã: A Retomada Da Língua Do Povo Pataxó. Revista 
LinguíStica. Volume 13, n. 1 jan de 2017, p. 303-327. ISSN 2238-975X 1. 
https://revistas.ufrj.br/index.php/rl.  
 
BRANDÃO, Ana Paula. Verb morphology in Paresi-Haliti (Aruak). Qualifying paper, 
University of Texas at Austin, 2010. 
 
BRANDÃO, Ana Paula. A reference gramar of Paresi-haliti (Aruák). PhD dissertation, 
University of Texas at Austin, 2014. 
 
BRANDÃO, Ana Paula; CARVALHO, Fernando; PEREIRA, Everton. Estudo histórico-
comparativo preliminar do subgrupo Juruena (Aruák). Trabalho apresentado no Congresso 
Internacional de Estudos Linguísticos e Literários na Amazônia (VI CIELLA), Belém, 
2018. 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
BRANDÃO, Ana Paula; REIS, Thainá de Lima. Gênero gramatical em Enawene Nawe? 
Revista de Letras Norte@mento. Dossiê Temático: Para a década das línguas indígenas, 
Sinop, v. 13, n. 33, p. 208-227, nov. 2020. 
 
BRANDÃO, Ana Paula; ZEZOKIWARE, Jurandir. A documentação participativa: O caso das 
línguas Paresi e Enawene Nawe. Revista Moara. Edição 50. Agosto - Junho de 2018, Estudos 
Linguísticos. ISSN: 0104-0944  
 
CARROLL, Stephanie Russo; GARBA, Ibrahim; FIGUEROA-RODRÍGUEZ, Oscar L.; 
HOLBROOK, Jarita; LOVETT, Raymond; MATERECHERA, Simeon; PARSONS, Mark; 
RASEROKA, Kay; RODRIGUEZ-LONEBEAR, Desi; ROWE, Robyn; SARA, Rodrigo; 
WALKER, Jennifer D.; ANDERSON, Jane; HUDSON, Maui. The care principles for 
Indigenous data governance. Data Science Journal. vol. 19. n. 1. p.1-12. 4 de novembro de 
2020. https://doi.org/10.5334/dsj-2019-031.   
 
CONZETT, Philipp; DE SMEDT, Koenradd. Guidance for citing linguistic data. In: BEREZ-
KROEKER, Andrea L.; MCDONNELL, Bradley; KOLLER, Eve; COLLISTER, Lauren B. 
(orgs.). The Open Handbook of Linguistic Data Management. p. 143–155. Cambridge: The 
MIT Press, 2022. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/12200.001.0001. 
 
COWELL, Andrew. Time-aligned Annotations of Bodega Miwok Sound Recordings. 2019-
18. California Language Archive, Survey of California and Other Indian Languages, University 
of California, Berkeley. Disponível em: http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.7297/X2251GC0. 
 
CZAYKOWSKA-HIGGINS, Ewa. Research Models, Community Engagement, and Linguistic 
Fieldwork: Reflections on Working within Canadian Indigenous Communities. Language 
Documentation and Conservation. Vol. 3. n. 1. p. 15-50. 2009. 
 
DEBENPORT, Erin. The potential complexity of ‘universal ownership’: Cultural property, 
textual circulation, and linguistic fieldwork. Language & Communication. vol. 30, n. 3. p. 
204-210. Julho de 2010. 
DIGITAL PRESERVATION COALITION (DPC). Glossary. Digital Preservation 
Handbook. Ed. 2. 2015. Dispnível em: https://www.dpconline.org/handbook/glossary  
 
DOBRIN, Lise M. From Linguistic Elicitation to Eliciting the Linguist: Lessons in Community 
Empowerment from Melanesia. Languageb. Vol. 84, n. 2. p.300-324. Junho de 2008. 
 
DOBRIN, Lise M.; SCHWARTZ, Saul. The social lives of linguistic legacy materials. 
Language Documentation and Description. vol. 21. p. 1-36. 2021. 
 
DWYER, Arienne M. Ethics and Practicalities of Cooperative Fieldwork and Analysis. In: 
GIPPERT, Jost; HIMMELMANN, Nikolaus P.; MOSEL, Ulrike (orgs.). Essentials of 
Language Documentation. p. 31-66. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 2006. 
 
ELAN (version 5.9). Nijmegen: Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, The Language 
Archive. https://tla.mpi.nl/tools/tla-tools/elan/. 2020. 
 
FABRE, Alain. Diccionario etnolinguístico y guía bibliográfica de los pueblos indígenas 
sudamericanos, Arawak. 2005. Disponível em: 
 http://www.ling.fi/Entradas%20diccionario/Dic=Arawak.pdf.  
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
 
FIELDWORKS (FLEx) (version 8.3.12). 2019. SIL. https://software.sil.org/fieldworks/. 
 
GALUCIO, Ana Vilacy; MOORE, Denny; VAN DER VOORT, Hein.  2018. O Patrimônio 
linguístico do Brasil: Novas perspectivas e abordagens no planejamento e gestão de uma 
política de diversidade linguística. Revista do Patrimônio Histórico e Artístico Nacional. n. 
38. p. 194-219.   
 
GASSER, Emily. The right to say yes: Language Documentation in West Papua. Australian 
Journal 
of 
Linguistics. 
vol. 
37, 
n. 
4. 
Ago 
2017. 
p. 
502-526. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/07268602.2017.1350131. 
 
GEHR, Susan. Breath of Life: Revitalizing California’s Native Languages Through 
Archives. MA thesis, San José State University, 2013. https://doi.org/10.31979/etd.yfva-e77q. 
 
GEORGE, Christine; JOSEPH, Lawrence; XAVIER, Felix; NOBLE JR, Gladwyn K. 
Linguistic Materials on Indigenous Languages of Guyana, 2018-03, California Language 
Archive, Survey of California and Other Indian Languages, University of California, Berkeley, 
1965. http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.7297/X2NC5ZCN. 
 
GLENN, Akiemi. Five Dimensions of Collaboration: Toward a Critical Theory of Coordination 
and 
Interoperability 
in 
Language 
Documentation. 
Language 
Documentation 
& 
Conservation. vol. 3, n. 2. p. 149-160. Dez 2009. 
 
GODDARD, Ives. Philological Approaches to the Study of North American Indian Languages: 
Documents and Documentation. In: SEBEO, Thomas A. (org.). Current Trends in 
Linguistic:, Linguistics in North America. vol. 10.  p. 727-745. The Hague: Mouton, 1973. 
 
GOOD, Jeff. The Scope of Linguistic Data. In: BEREZ-KROEKER, Andrea L.; 
MCDONNELL, Bradley; KOLLER, Eve; COLLISTER, Lauren B. (orgs.). The Open 
Handbook of Linguistic Data Management. p. 27-47. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2022. 
 
GRINEVALD, Colette. Worrying about Ethics and Wondering about ‘Informed Consent’: 
Fieldwork from an Americanist Perspective. In: SAXENA, Anju; BORIN, Lars (orgs.). Lesser-
Known Languages of South Asia: Status and Policies, Case Studies and Applications of 
Information Technology. p. 339-370. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton, 2006. https://doi-
org/10.1515/9783110197785.3.339. 
 
HALTON, John; HOLTON, Gary; SEYFEDDINIPUR, Mandana; THIEBERGER, Nicholas. 
Lameta [software]. 202. Disponível em: https://github.com/onset/laMETA/releases. 
 
HAN, Na-Rae. Transforming Data. In: BEREZ-KROEKER Andrea L. ; MCDONNELL, 
Bradley; KOLLER, Eve; COLLISTER, Lauren B. (orgs.) The Open Handbook of Linguistic 
Data 
Management. 
p. 
73-87. 
Cambridge: 
The 
MIT 
Press, 
2022. 
https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/12200.001.0001. 
 
HENKE, Ryan; BEREZ-KROEKER, Andrea L. A Brief History of Archiving in Language 
Documentation, with 
an Annotated Bibliography. 
Language Documentation & 
Conservation. vol. 10. p. 411-457. 2016. 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
HIMMELMANN, Nikolaus P. Documentary and descriptive linguistics. Linguistics. vol. 36. 
p. 161-195. 1998. 
 
HIMMELMANN, Nikolaus P. Language documentation: What is it and what is it good for? In:  
GIPPERT, Jost; HIMMELMANN, Nikolaus P.; MOSEL, Ulrike (orgs.). Essentials of 
Language Documentation. p. 1-30. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 2006. 
 
HIMMELMANN, Nikolaus P. Linguistic Data Types and the Interface between Language 
Documentation and Description. Language Documentation & Conservation. vol. 6. p. 187-
207. 2012. 
 
HOLTON, Gary. Relatively Ethical: A Comparison of Linguistic Research Paradigms in 
Alaska and Indonesia. Language Documentation & Conservation. vol. 3, n. 2. p. 161-75. 
2009. 
 
HOLTON, Gary; LEONARD, Wesley Y.; PULSIFER, Peter L. Indigenous Peoples, Ethics, 
and Linguistic Data. In: BEREZ-KROEKER Andrea L.; MCDONNELL, Bradley; KOLLER, 
Eve; COLLISTER, Lauren B. (orgs.). The Open Handbook of Linguistic Data Management. 
p. 49-60. Cambridge: The MIT Press, 2022. https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/12200.001.0001. 
 
INNES, Pamela. Ethical Problems in Archival Research: Beyond Accessibility. Language & 
Communication. 
vol. 
30, 
n. 
3. 
p. 
198–203. 
Jul 
2010. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.langcom.2009.11.006. 
 
JOHNSON, Heidi. Language documentation and archiving, or how to build a better corpus. In: 
AUSTIN, Peter K. (org.). Language Documentation and Description. vol. 2. p. 140-153. 
London: SOAS, 2004. 
 
KAPLAN, Judith; LEMOV, Rebecca. 2019. Archiving Endangerment, Endangered Archives: 
Journeys through the Sound Archives of Americanist Anthropology and Linguistics, 1911–
2016. Technology and Culture. 60 (2): S161–87. https://doi.org/10.1353/tech.2019.0067. 
 
KUNG, 
Susan 
Smythe; 
SULLIVANT, 
Ryan; 
POJMAN, 
Elena; 
NIWAGABA; 
Alicia. Archiving for the Future: Simple Steps for Archiving Language Documentation 
Collections [OER]. 2020. Disponível em:  https://archivingforthefuture.teachable.com/. CC 
BY-SA 4.0 international license. 
 
KUNG, Susan Smythe. Data archiving, access, and repatriation. In: STANLAW, James (org.). 
The International Encyclopedia of Linguistic Anthropology. Wiley Online Library, 2020. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118786093.iela0430. 
 
LEONARD, Wesley Y.; HAYNES, Erin. Making ‘Collaboration’ Collaborative: An 
Examination of Perspectives That Frame Linguistic Field Research. 
Language 
Documentation and Conservation. vol.  4. p. 268-293. 2010. 
 
LUKANIEC, Megan. Managing Data from Archival Documentation for Language 
Reclamation. In: BEREZ-KROEKER, Andrea L.; MCDONNELL, Bradley; KOLLER, Eve; 
COLLISTER, Lauren B. (orgs.). The Open Handbook of Linguistic Data Management. p. 
315-325. Cambridge: The MIT Press, 2022. https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/12200.001.0001. 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
MACRI, Martha J.; SARMENTO; James. Respecting Privacy: Ethical and Pragmatic 
Considerations. Language & Communication. Vol. 30, n. 3. p. 92–97. Jul 2010. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.langcom.2009.11.005. 
 
MILLER, Ellis R. 2021. Phylogenetic Classification of the Negro-Roraima Subgroup. BA 
thesis, University of California, Berkeley. 
 
MILLER, Robert J. Introduction. In: LINK, Adrianna; SHELTON, Abigail; SPERO, Patrick 
(orgs.). Indigenous Languages and the Promise of Archives. p.1-24. Lincoln: University of 
Nebraska Press, 2021. 
 
MOORE, Denny. Endangered languages of lowland tropical South America. In: 
BRENZINGER, Matthias (org.). Language Diversity Endangered. p. 29-58. Berlin: Mouton 
de Gruyter, 2007. 
 
MOORE, Denny; GALUCIO, Ana Vilacy. Perspectives for the documentation of indigenous 
languages in Brazil. In: PÉREZ BÁEZ, Gabriela; ROGERS, Chris; ROSÉS LABRADA, Jorge 
Emilio (orgs). Language Documentation and Revitalization in Latin American Contexts. 
p. 29-58. Berlin & Boston: De Gruyter Mouton, 2016. 
 
MOORE, Denny; GALUCIO, Ana Vilacy; GABAS JR, Nilson.. Desafio de documentar e 
preservar as línguas Amazônicas. Scientific American Brasil. n. 3. p. 36-43. 2008. 
 
NATHAN, David. Progressive archiving: Theoretical and practical implications for 
documentary linguistics. Presentation at the International Conference on Language 
Documentation and Conservation, March 3, 2013. http://hdl.handle.net/10125/26115. 
 
O’HAGAN, Zachary. A Phonological Sketch of Atorai (Arawak, Guyana) Based on Unique 
Recordings. Presentation at Fieldwork Forum, Berkeley, May 2 2018. 
 
O’HAGAN, Zachary.. Obituario, Gerald Weiss (1932-2021). Amazonía peruana n. 34. p. 279-
286. Jul 2021. 
 
O’MEARA, Caroline; GONZÁLEZ GUADARRAMA, Octavio Alonso. Accessibility to 
Results and Primary Data of Research on Indigenous Languages of Mexico. In: PÉREZ BÁEZ, 
Gabriela; ROGERS, Chris; ROSÉS LABRADA, Jorge Emilio (orgs.). Language 
Documentation and Revitalization in Latin American Contexts. p. 59-80. Berlin & Boston: 
De Gruyter Mouton, 2016. https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110428902. 
 
O’MEARA, Carolyn; GOOD, Jeff. Ethical issues in Legacy Language Resources. Language 
& Communication. Vol. 30, n. 3. p. 162-170. July 2010. 
 
OWENS, Trevor. The Theory and Craft of Digital Preservation. Baltimore: John Hopkins 
University Press, 2018.  
 
PARKER, Verdena. The Verdena Parker Collection of Hupa Sound Recordings and Films, 
LA 256. California Language Archive, Survey of California and Other Indian Languages, 
University of California, Berkeley, s.d. http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.7297/X29S1PBD. 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
PARKER, Verdena; CAMPBELL, Amy; ESCAMILLA, Ramón; NEWBOLD, Lindsey; 
SPENCE, Justin. Materials of the Hupa Language Documentation Project, 2017-06. 
California Language Archive, Survey of California and Other Indian Languages, University of 
California, Berkeley, 2005+. http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.7297/X22R3Q2G. 
 
PAYNE, David L. A classification of Maipuran (Arawakan) languages based on shared lexical 
retentions. In: DERBYSHIRE, Desmond; PULLUM, Geoffrey (orgs.). Handbook of 
Amazonian Languages. vol. 3. p. 355-499. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 1991.  
 
PEREIRA, Everton. Estudo histórico-comparativo preliminar das línguas Paresi e 
Enawene Nawe. Trabalho de Conclusão de Curso. Universidade Federal do Pará, 2018.  
 
PÉREZ BÁEZ, Gabriela (photographer). Kaufman Collection acquisition trip photos 
(DSC_0001.JPG). Archiving the Terrence Kaufman Collection. The Archive of the Indigenous 
Languages of Latin America, ailla.utexas.org. Access: Public. PID ailla:257492. 
 
PÉREZ BÁEZ, Gabriela (photographer). Kaufman Collection acquisition trip photos 
(DSC_0052.JPG). Archiving the Terrence Kaufman Collection. The Archive of the Indigenous 
Languages of Latin America, ailla.utexas.org. Access: Public. PID ailla:257543. 
 
PÉREZ BÁEZ, Gabriela; ROGERS, Chris; ROSÉS LABRADA, Jorge Emilio. Language 
Documentation and Revitalization in Latin American Contexts. Berlin & Boston: De 
Gruyter Mouton, 2016. https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110428902. 
 
RAMIREZ, Henri. Línguas Arawak da Amazônia setentrional: Comparação e descrição. 
Manaus: Editora da Universidade do Amazonas, 2001.  
 
REIS, Thainá de Lima. Uma Análise Preliminar do Gênero Gramatical em Enawene Nawe 
(Aruák). Trabalho de Conclusão de Curso. Universidade Federal do Pará, 2020.  
 
REZENDE, Ubiray. Fonética e fonologia da língua Enawene-Nawe (Aruak): Uma primeira 
abordagem. Dissertação de Mestrado. Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, 2003. 
 
REZENDE, Ubiray. Aspectos da gramática da língua Enawene-Nawe (Aruak). Tese de 
Doutorado, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, 2013. 
 
RICE, Alexander. Using YouTube as the Primary Transcription and Translation Platform for 
Remote Corpus Work. Language Documentation & Conservation. Vol. 15. p. 514-550. 2021. 
 
ROBINSON, Laura C. Archiving directly from the field. In: BARWICK, Linda; 
THIEBERGER, Nicholas (orgs.). Sustainable data from digital fieldwork. p. 23-32. Sydney: 
University of Sydney Press, 2006. 
 
ROBINSON, Laura C. 2010. Informed Consent among Analog People in a Digital World. 
Language 
& 
Communication. 
vol. 
30, 
n. 
3. 
Jul 
2010. 
p. 
186-191.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.langcom.2009.11.002. 
 
ROSÉS LABRADA, Jorge Emilio. The Mako Language: Vitality, Grammar and 
Classification. PhD dissertation, University of Western Ontario & Université Lumière-Lyon, 
2015. https://ir.lib.uwo.ca/etd/2851. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
 
DOS SANTOS, Wesley. Kawahiva Language Documentation Archive, 2019-06. California 
Language Archive, Survey of California and Other Indian Languages, University of California, 
Berkeley, 2017+ http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.7297/X2P26W9H. 
 
SAPIÉN, Racquel-María. 2018. Design and Implementation of Collaborative Language 
Documentation Projects. In: REHG, Kenneth L.; CAMPBELL, Lyle (orgs.). The Oxford 
Handbook of Endangered Languages. pp. 203-224. Oxford & New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2018. 
 
SEIFART, Frank; DRUDE, Sebastian; FRANCHETTO, Bruna; GASCHÉ, Jürg; 
GOLLUSCIO, Lucía; MANRIQUE, Elizabeth. Language Documentation and Archives in 
South America. Language Documentation and Conservation. vol. 2. n. 1. Junho de 2008. p. 
130-140. 
 
SILVA, Glauber. Fonologia da lingua Paresi-Haliti (Aruak). Dissertação de Mestrado, 
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, 2009. 
 
SILVA, Glauber Romling da. Morfossintaxe da língua Paresi-Haliti. Tese de Doutorado, 
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, 2013. 
 
SPENCE, Justin. Learning Languages through Archives. In: HINTON, Leanne; HUSS, Leena; 
ROCHE, Gerald (orgs.). The Routledge Handbook of Language Revitalization. p. 179-187. 
New York: Routledge, 2018. 
 
THIEBERGER, Nicholas. Lost and Found: Linguists and musicologists at three Australian 
universities are working together to preserve rare recordings and make them accessible to 
communities across the Pacific and beyond. The ACU Review. Publicado em 06 de dezembro 
de 2019. Disponível em: https://www.acu.ac.uk/the-acu-review/lost-and-found/. 
 
THIEBERGER, Nicholas; BEREZ, Andrea L. Linguistic data management. In: 
THIEBERGER, Nicholas (org.). The Oxford Handbook of Linguistic Fieldwork. p. 90-118. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012.   
 
United Nations General Assembly. 2007. United Nations Declaration on the Rights of 
Indigenous Peoples: Resolution adopted by the General Assembly, 2 October 2007, 
A/RES/61/295. https://www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii/documents/DRIPS_en.pdf (English), 
https://www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii/documents/DRIPS_pt.pdf (Portuguese). 
 
VAPNARSKY, Valentina. Circulation et virtualités des savoirs amérindiens à l’ère du 
numérique – From home base to database…and back? The circulation and virtualities of 
Amerindian knowledge in the digital era. Journal de la Société des américanistes Vol. 106, 
n. 2. p. 79-104. 2020. 
 
WEISS, Gerald. The Cosmology of the Campa Indians of Eastern Peru. PhD dissertation, 
University of Michigan, 1969. 
 
WILBUR, Joshua. Archiving for the Community: Engaging Local Archives in Language 
Documentation Projects. In: NATHAN, David; AUSTIN, Peter K. (orgs.). Language 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
 
 
Documentation and Description. Volume 12: Special Issue on Language Documentation and 
Archiving. pp. 85-102. London: SOAS, 2014. 
 
WOODBURY, Anthony C. Defining documentary linguistics. In: AUSTIN, Peter K. (org.). 
Language Documentation and Description, vol 1. p. 35-51. London: SOAS, 2003.  
 
YAMADA, Racquel María. Collaborative Linguistic Fieldwork: Practical Application of the 
Empowerment Model. Language Documentation & Conservation. vol. 1, n. 2. p. 257-282. 
Dezembro de 2007. 
 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4755
This preprint was submitted under the following conditions: 
The authors declare that they are aware that they are solely responsible for the content of the preprint and
that the deposit in SciELO Preprints does not mean any commitment on the part of SciELO, except its
preservation and dissemination.
The authors declare that the necessary Terms of Free and Informed Consent of participants or patients in
the research were obtained and are described in the manuscript, when applicable.
The authors declare that the preparation of the manuscript followed the ethical norms of scientific
communication.
The authors declare that the data, applications, and other content underlying the manuscript are
referenced.
The deposited manuscript is in PDF format.
The authors declare that the research that originated the manuscript followed good ethical practices and
that the necessary approvals from research ethics committees, when applicable, are described in the
manuscript.
The authors declare that once a manuscript is posted on the SciELO Preprints server, it can only be taken
down on request to the SciELO Preprints server Editorial Secretariat, who will post a retraction notice in its
place.
The authors agree that the approved manuscript will be made available under a Creative Commons CC-BY
license.
The submitting author declares that the contributions of all authors and conflict of interest statement are
included explicitly and in specific sections of the manuscript.
The authors declare that the manuscript was not deposited and/or previously made available on another
preprint server or published by a journal.
If the manuscript is being reviewed or being prepared for publishing but not yet published by a journal, the
authors declare that they have received authorization from the journal to make this deposit.
The submitting author declares that all authors of the manuscript agree with the submission to SciELO
Preprints.
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
