Objective: To determine whether the SEIR model, associated to mobility changes parameters, can determine the likelihood of establishing control over an epidemic in a city, state or country.
Study design and setting: The critical step in the prediction of COVID-19 by a SEIR model are the values of the basic reproduction number (R0) and the infectious period, in days. R0 and the infectious periods were calculated by mathematical constrained optimization, and used to determine the numerically minimum SEIR model errors in a country, based on COVID-19 data until April 11th. The Community Mobility Reports from Google Maps (<https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility>) provided mobility changes on April 5th compared to the baseline (Jan 3th to Feb 6th). The data was used to measure the non-pharmacological intervention adherence. The impact of each mobility component was calculated by logistic regression models. COVID-19 control was defined by SEIR model R0<1.0 in a country.
Results: The ECDC has registered 1,653,204 COVID-19 worldwide on April 11th. Sixteen countries presented 78% of all cases. Of the six Google Maps mobility parameters, the “Stay at home” parameter was the strongest one to control COVID-19 in a country: an increase of 50% in mobility trends for places of residence has a 99% chance of outbreak control.
Conclusions: Residential mobility restriction presented itself as the most effective measure. The SEIR model associated with mobility parameters proved to be a useful tool in determining the chance of COVID-19 outbreak control.
In December 2009, a cluster of patients with pneumonia was reported in the city of Wuhan, capital of Hubei province, China, caused by a novel coronavirus, named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). This name was attributed to the virus due to its genetic relation to another coronavirus, responsible for the severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) outbreak of 20031,2. In February 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) announced COVID-19 as the name of this new disease2. On January 30th, 2020, the WHO declared that the outbreak of the new coronavirus (formerly called 2019-nCoV) constituted a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC), advising countries to prepare for containment measures3. On March 11th, 2020, the WHO characterized COVID-19 as a pandemic4.
Viral transmission is not fully understood yet. The spread of SARS-CoV-2 from person-to-person, via respiratory droplets, is the predominant hypothesis5. Individuals with asymptomatic infections or within the incubation period are also believed to transmit the virus6,7.
Non-pharmacological interventions for the prevention of transmission and infection of this pathogen include isolation at home, voluntary quarantine at home, social distancing from the entire population, especially the elderly, and temporary closure of schools, universities, and workplaces8.
Mathematical models can provide a better understanding of the transmission dynamics of COVID-19. Using a well-fitted mathematical model, it is possible to extrapolate current information about the epidemic, to estimate the chances for future outbreak control, and to provide guidance for the creation of mitigation strategies by public health agents.
The modeling of infectious diseases can be done by compartmental mathematical models such as SIR (susceptible-infected-recovered), SEIR (susceptible-exposed-infected- recovered), SIS (susceptible-infected-susceptible), MSIR (maternally derived immunity- susceptible-infected-recovered)9. The objective of the study was to evaluate whether the SEIR model, associated with different community mobility restriction parameters, can determine the chances of controlling COVID-19 outbreaks.
The susceptible-exposed-infected-recovered (SEIR) compartmentalized epidemiological model has been previously used during the initial wave of the H1N1 influenza pandemic in 2009. A susceptible person (S) is exposed to the virus and becomes a latent or exposed individual (E). After the incubation period, latent individuals become infected (I), who can be recovered (R) in a specific period of time by a recovery rate (dead people are included in the recovered group). Increased transmission and recovery rates ultimately abbreviate the total duration of the epidemic10.
The SEIR model is defined by a system of four ordinary differential equations, which are described in the algorithm (Figures 1A and 1B). For the mathematical modeling of the spread of COVID-19, four parameters of the SEIR model were obtained by international experiences: the incubation period=3.7 days11, the proportion of critical cases=0.0511, the overall case-fatality rate=0.02311, and the estimated proportion of asymptomatic patients with COVID-19=0.1812. These values can be modified for a specific region, but, the critical step in the prediction of COVID-19 by the model is the value of the basic reproduction number (R0) and the infectious period, in days (T_infectious), which were calculated by mathematical constrained optimization.
A Solver from Microsoft® Excel or NEOS Server, for example (https://neos- server.org/neos/), can be used for finding numerically minimum of a function Z, which represents the sum of squared errors between each new case of COVID-19 observed in one day, and the cases predicted by the SEIR model in three phases (Equation 1): <>
The Community Mobility Reports from Google Maps aim to provide insights into what has changed in response to policies aimed at combating COVID-19 (<https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility/>). The reports chart movement trends over time by geographic regions, across different categories of places such as retail and recreation, groceries and pharmacies, parks, transit stations, workplaces, and residential. This data is retrieved from users mobile phone location tracking, obtained with previous user consent. The Mobility Report from Google Maps was used to measure adherence to non-pharmacological intervention (Google LLC “Google COVID-19 Community Mobility Reports”).
The impact of each mobility component was caused by logistic regression models, and the outcome control in a country is defined by a basic reproduction number (R0) below 1.0.
Six logistic regression models were built for each Google Maps mobility parameter: Retail & recreation (mobility trends for places like restaurants, cafes, shopping centers, theme parks, museums, libraries, and movie theaters); Grocery and pharmacy (mobility trends for places like grocery markets, food warehouses, farmers markets, specialty food shops, drug stores, and pharmacies); Parks (mobility trends for places like national parks, public beaches, marinas, dog parks, plazas, and public gardens); Transit stations (mobility trends for places like public transport hubs such as subway, bus, and train stations); Workplaces (mobility trends for places of work); and Residential (mobility trends for places of residence). The percentage of mobility changes in each country was the exposure variable for the logistic regression modeling.
On April 11th, the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) registered 1,653,204 COVID-19 cases (<https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications- data/download-todays-data-geographic-distribution-covid-19-cases-worldwide>) from 206 countries and territories, of which only 16 (8%) accounted for 78% of all cases (Figure 2).
Table 1 shows the changes in mobility on April 5th compared to the baseline (5- week period; Jan 3rd to Feb 6th, 2020) and the numbers of reproduction (R0) and infectious periods, in days (T_infectious), for these 16 countries. Only Spain, Austria, Switzerland, Italy, and Israel had R0 less than 1.0, i.e., only five countries had controlled the epidemic on April 5th. Figure 3 shows the SEIR models the countries.
The basic numbers of reproduction (R0) and infectious periods, in days (T_infectious), in Table 1 were calculated for the third phase of the epidemic by the mathematical constrained optimization used to find the numerically minimum of a Z function (Equation 1) in each country, based on real COVID-19 data until April 11th. These numbers represent every new cases, meaning that R0<1 represent a controlled scenario, and values higher than one stand for an uncontrolled one, that is, the higher the figure the more the infection is spread.
Table 2 summarizes the impact of each mobility component on epidemic control. The chance of control is calculated by logistic regression models. The logistic regression used logistic coefficients for each of the 6 parameters based on Google Maps® localization data. These logistic coefficients were then used to calculate the minimum mobility restrictions for each parameter and also the chance to control the outbreak in case such restriction percentages were met.
Residential mobility restriction presented the highest logistic coefficient (17.7), i.e., this parameter had a high impact on outbreak control, considering that a 32% increase in the isolation of people in their households can generate a 90% chance of controlling the outbreak.
Workplace mobility restriction was the second most effective measure, considering a minimum restriction of 56% for an outbreak control chance of 53%. Retail and recreation mobility presented 53 and 86%, respectively. Transit stations (96 and 54%) were also assessed. Park mobility restriction demonstrated the least efficacy in outbreak control, considering that absolute restriction (100%) provided the lowest chance of outbreak control (46%).
The impact of each Google Maps mobility component on the probability of epidemic control was simulated in Figure 4: “stay at home” and “stay out of the workplace” are the strongest ways to control COVID-19 spreading. Based on these simulations in the graph, it is possible to evaluate the impact of each mobility component. For example, to achieve at least a 50% chance of epidemic control, it is necessary an increase of only 22% in the mobility trends for places of residence. On the other hand, a reduction in all other components is necessary to a successful control of the epidemic: 56% cutback in the mobility trends for places of work; minus 84% in places like restaurants, cafes, shopping centers, theme parks, museums, libraries, and movie theaters; minus 76% in places like grocery markets, food warehouses, farmers markets, specialty food shops, drug stores, and pharmacies; minus 92% in places like public transport hubs such as subway, bus, and train stations. Even a 100% reduction in the mobility trends for places like national parks, public beaches, marinas, dog parks, plazas, and public gardens it is not enough to control the COVID-19.
This study is based on a mathematical modeling which, in spite of being subject to limitations, can foretell COVID-19 cases in a region. The analysis was not performed by a statistical modeling process, but rather by a numerical perspective. The reproduction number of COVID-19 was estimated according to the cases confirmed and registered in each country. Although R0 was higher than initially expected, estimates based on likelihood and model analysis have shown that R0 could be as high as 6.513. These higher values are compatible with other studies, such as Liu et al., which concluded that the reproductive number of COVID-19 is higher than that of SARS coronavirus14.
Analyzing R0 values, it is possible to measure the spread or control of the epidemic in each country. Table 1 shows that of the 16 countries analyzed, only 5 show R0<1, which represents a controlled epidemic. These 5 countries had mean R0 of 0.6 and the biggest change in Residential mobility in the period. The remaining 11 countries had mean R0 of 1.9. There was a raise in 20% of the population at home compared to the baseline in these 5 countries on April 5th, whereas the other 11 countries had a 14% increase. This indicates the correlation between the change in populational Residential mobility and the control of the epidemic.
A 50% rate of social isolation at home is estimated to be considered sufficient to control COVID-19 epidemic. Residential mobility restriction presented itself as the most effective measure for the least amount of effort, considering an increase of 50% in the mobility trends for places of residence has a 99% chance of outbreak control. It is speculated that residency isolation would indirectly reduce the total number of individuals in public places.
The degree to which mobility restrictions increase or decrease the overall epidemic size depends on the level of risk in each community and the characteristics of the disease15. More research is required in order to estimate the optimal balance between mobility restriction, outbreak control, economy, and freedom of movement.