Publication status: Not informed by the submitting author
Generalist diets allows opportunism behavior to engage in
cleaning interactions among birds and large mammals
Julia Acquaviva, Paulo Roberto Guimarães Junior
https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4744
Submitted on: 2022-09-22
Posted on: 2022-09-29 (version 1)
(YYYY-MM-DD)
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
 
 
 
SciELO Preprints - preprints.scielo.org 
1 
Generalist diets allows opportunism behavior to engage in 
cleaning interactions among birds and large mammals 
Julia Nader Acquaviva 
Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, São Paulo, Brasil. ORCID: 
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8394-6317 
Paulo Roberto Guimarães Junior 
Univerisdade de São Paulo, São Paulo, São Paulo, Brasil. ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-
0001-9161-8305 
 
ABSTRACT 
Cleaning interactions are interspecific associations in which cleaners  benefit from the hosts 
by feeding on parasites, injured tissues, or blood. All around the globe there is a remarkable 
diversity of birds that behave as cleaners of large mammals. Here we investigated the drivers 
shaping the organization of networks formed by cleaning birds and host mammals. We used 
two cleaner-host networks, one from Brazilian openlands and the other one from African 
openlands, to explore the relationship between diet generalism and cleaning behavior. We 
hypothesize that cleaning interactions are often opportunistic and, as a consequence, we 
expect that generalist species are the main components of cleaner-host networks. We first 
contrast the diet diversity of cleaner species with their closed related species. For 18 of 26 
bird families, cleaners show higher diet diversity than closely-related, non-cleaning species.  
Then we explored if birds with higher diversity diets are the central species of the cleaner-host 
networks. The results show that there is no apparent correlation between species centrality in 
the networks and their diet diversity. We suggest that generalism allows opportunist species 
to engage in cleaning interactions, but the importance of a cleaner species is affected by other 
attributes, such as abundance and behavioral traits associated with cleaning behavior. In a 
broader perspective, these results suggest that the factors that may allow species to 
participate in ecological networks are not the same that modulate their role in the same 
networks. 
Keywords: 
Cleaning-symbiosis, Opportunism, Diet-diversity, Birds, Network-centrality 
Introduction 
In ecological communities, ecological interactions connect individuals of different 
species.  Ecological interactions have far-reaching consequences  for population ecology 
(Macarthur 1955, Jordano 2016) and evolution (Drossel et al. 2001, Guimarães et al. 2011), 
affecting the persistence of biodiversity at community level (Paine 1966, Fontaine et al 2006, 
Hale et al. 2020). At community level, ecological interactions often form networks because 
pairs of interacting species are linked to each other (Pascual & Dunne 2006; Jordano et al. 
2006). Several types of interactions, such as mutualisms among plants and seed dispersers 
and pollinators (Bascompte et al. 2003), predator and prey interactions among mammals 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4744
 
 
 
 
SciELO Preprints - preprints.scielo.org 
2 
(Pires & Guimarães 2013), facilitative interactions among plant species (Verdú 2010), and 
cleaning interactions among fish (Guimarães et al. 2007) form species-rich networks showing 
a myriad of nonrandom network patterns. These nonrandom network patterns include 
nestedness (e.g. Guimarães et al. 2007; Bascompte et al. 2003) and modularity (e.g. Olesen 
et al. 2007).  
Nestedness patterns implies that the networks show  asymmetries, in which species 
with many interactions form a core of interactions, and species with fewer interactions usually 
do not interact with each other (Bascompte et al 2003). In contrast, modularity patterns imply 
that most interactions are organized in modules, i.e., semi-isolated and densely connected 
groups of interacting species (Olesen et al. 2007, Pimm & Lawton 1990). These nonrandom 
patterns of the network reflect (i) the variation in the average levels of specializations and 
generalism and (ii) the nonrandom patterns of niche overlap across different types of 
interaction (Guimarães 2020). In this sense, the structure of ecological networks may partially 
encode the processes shaping the ecological interactions and affecting the organization of 
ecological communities (Jordano et al. 2003;  Bastolla et al. 2009; Guimarães 2020).  
In the simplest scenario, individuals of different species are generalists, interacting with 
partners in an opportunistic way, e.g., feeding on resources in the frequency they are available 
in the environment. Although there is compelling evidence of departures of the patterns of 
interaction expected by the availability of resources (Olesen et al. 2011; Kuebbing et al. 2013; 
Pekkonen et al. 2013), the assumption that individuals interact as opportunistic foragers allows 
insights on the organization of ecological networks. Specifically, opportunism at the individual 
level implies that, at the species level, variation in number of interactions across species would 
be correlated with species abundances (Vazquez et al. 2007; Krishna et al. 2008).  
Indeed, a number of network patterns can be explained by differences in abundance 
among species (Vázquez et al. 2005, 2007; Lewinsohn et al. 2006) which suggest, in turn, 
that opportunism has a central role in the organization of many ecological networks. 
Opportunism  may allow species to engage in new types of interactions, exploring novel 
resources and structuring, at the community level, networks of interacting species. To engage 
in new interactions, those species should be able, by their traits and behavior, to interact with 
a broad diversity of individuals and species. Thus, not only resource availability would 
determine the engagement of new interactions and the opportunistic behavior, but also the 
diversity of resource consumption.  
Although opportunism may be a central component of some ecological networks, 
opportunistic species coexist with highly specialized lifestyles that are also part of the network. 
Some highly specialized lifestyles are extreme specialists that interact with single partners, 
such as some gall-making insects, floral parasites, myrmecophytes, and anemonefishes. 
Other highly specialized lifestyles are highly connected species which rely upon a diversity of 
partners (i.e., a network) to persist. Examples of these highly connected lifestyles include 
obligate nectarivorous insects, obligate frugivorous birds, cleaner fishes, hypercarnivores, and 
highly specialized cleaning birds, such as the oxpeckers. By exploring how ecological 
networks combine opportunists and specialized lifestyles we may obtain insights on how 
ecological and evolutionary processes built up species-rich assemblages of interacting 
species.  
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4744
 
 
 
 
SciELO Preprints - preprints.scielo.org 
3 
Here, we used cleaning interactions among birds and mammals as a study system to 
explore the role of  opportunism and specialized lifestyles in structuring ecological networks. 
Cleaning interactions are ecological interactions that involve clients and cleaners and occur in 
a number of marine and terrestrial ecosystems. In terrestrial systems, a number of bird species 
engage in cleaning interactions of mammalian herbivores. There is a remarkable diversity of 
birds that show this behavior, all around the globe (e.g. Ruggiero and Ewes 1988, Sazima 
2007a). The cleaners (birds) benefit from the hosts (large mammals) by feeding on parasites, 
injured tissue or blood (Ivan Sazima 2011). These interactions often provide benefits for the 
cleaner individual, but the effects on clients are variable, including negative, neutral, and 
positive effects. In the large majority of cases, cleaning behavior is facultative for birds. Having 
said that, some bird species, such as several caracaras (Falconidae) and some tyranid birds, 
show a number of stereotyped behaviors associated with cleaning. Moreover, in African 
savannahs, oxpeckers (Buphagus spp.) are highly specialized cleaners that obtain most of 
their feeding resources from these interactions. Thus, cleaning interactions show variability in 
the degree of opportunism and specialization and we used this variation to ask questions 
about the relative role of opportunism in shaping these interactions.  
We hypothesize that opportunism allows species to facultatively engage in cleaning 
interactions to obtain resources. We derived two predictions from this hypothesis. First, we 
expect that cleaners show higher diet generalism than closely related species (Fig 1A). If 
opportunism is the leading factor shaping cleaning interactions, opportunist species that 
already show generalist diets would add additional resources (mainly mammalian 
ectoparasites and damaged fleshy tissues) to their diets. Second, we expect opportunistic 
species to interact with more mammalian hosts and with hosts that are used by most of the 
other cleaning species, i.e., we expect that opportunistic species are the central species of the 
network (Fig 1B). We test these two predictions with two continent-level networks that depict 
information on natural history of cleaning interactions among birds and mammalian hosts in 
Africa and South America (Sazima et al. 2012; Mikula et al. 2017). 
Figure 1 a) 
 
 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4744
 
 
 
 
SciELO Preprints - preprints.scielo.org 
4 
Figure 1 b) 
 
Figure 1  Conceptual framework of the hypothesis. a) Does the cleaning habit is related to the 
diversity of diet in bird’s families? Assuming that the green birds in the figure clean mammals, 
and assuming opportunistic behavior as a response to the tendency of engaging in cleaning 
interactions, we ask if, in the same bird family, do species that have a generalistic diet 
(diversification on the feeding resources) also represent the cleaning bird species? b) Does 
the diversity of diet is related to the role of the cleaners in the cleaner-host networks? In the 
same network, do birds that have a diverse diet represent the central (degree) species? In 
other words, core cleaning species have a diverse diet? 
Material and Methods 
To understand how the diversity of diet of birds influences the cleaning associations 
among birds (cleaners) feed on parasites or injured tissue of mammals (clients), we first 
calculated a diversity diet index (H) for all bird species using the Elton Traits database, 
EltonTraits 1.0: Species-level foraging attributes of the world’s birds and mammals (Wilman 
H, et al. 2014). In this database, the diet of each bird species is categorized in terms of broad 
diet categories (Supplementary figure 1 a). We used these categories to estimate the diet 
diversity of each bird species by computing the Shannon’s Diversity Index (Shannon 1948): 
 
in which Hj is the diet diversity of species j, R  is the number of  diet categories (resources),  pi  
is the proportion of diet category i  in the diet of species j. In short, the higher the H value of 
the species, the higher is the diversity of diet resources each individual of the species can 
consume. Based on the two predictions divided previously (figure 1), we divided the methods 
in two sections: section (a) and section (b). In section (a) we compared the H values of cleaner 
bird species from Brazilian and African cleaning networks (Sazima et al. 2012; Mikula et al. 
2017) with the H observed in non cleaning closed-related species. In section (b) we tested if 
the values of H demonstrate a correlation with the centrality degree of both networks. The 
summary of the methods is represented in figure 2. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4744
 
 
 
 
SciELO Preprints - preprints.scielo.org 
5 
(a) Cleaner bird species and families 
We calculated the H of the cleaning bird species observed cleaning in Brazil and Africa 
registered in two previous works (Sazima et al. 2012; Mikula et al. 2017). Based on the birds 
species identified as cleaners, we selected the families that the species belong to. We 
identified a total number of 26 families. Then we compared the mean H of the 26 different bird 
families without the observed cleaners, with the mean H only of the cleaners, in the same 
given families (Fig 2). Our aim was to uncover a bias of generalist diet habits of cleaners, as 
we hypothesized that the cleaners would represent the species of their families with more 
diversification on their feeding habits. The details of the calculated H of the species and 
families can be accessed in Supplementary fig. 1.  
To uncover the differences between the means of H of families and cleaners, we used 
a Paired T-Test to determine whether the mean difference between these two sets of H is 
zero. Standard deviation and P-value were also calculated. 
(b) Cleaning networks and centrality degree 
We analyzed the centrality degree of the Brazilian and African networks (Sazima et al. 
2012; Mikula et al. 2017) by computing the number of host species that the cleaners species 
were interacting. We focused on degree measure, where the nodes (i.e species) that have 
more diverse interactions, represent the central nodes. Then we compared the centrality 
degree of each bird species with their H value, using a regression analysis. Our prediction was 
that the bird species that interact with many different hosts (i.e. more links with different 
mammal species) would be the birds with a higher H, meaning a positive correlation between 
these two measures (Fig 2). The details of hosts species and H of each bird species can be 
accessed in Supplementary fig. 2. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4744
 
 
 
 
SciELO Preprints - preprints.scielo.org 
6 
 
Figure 2 Methods of analysis that include the mean diversity index of diets of non-cleaners in 
a given family (<Hf> ) compared with the mean diversity index of diets of cleaners in the same 
given family ( <Hc> ). Also, using two empirical networks (Sazima et al. 2012; Mikula et al. 
2017) we calculated the centrality degree of the bird species and then we analyzed the 
centrality of these species with their diversity diet index (H). 
Results 
(a) Cleaner bird species and families 
The mean diversity of cleaners demonstrate higher values than non-cleaners in most 
families. For 18 of the 26 families analyzed in Brazil and Africa, the mean diversity was 
significantly higher for the cleaners (Fig. 3). For example, In Charadriidae family, the H mean 
value was about 0.268 without the cleaners (which in this family, represents about 93% of the 
members) but, if only considering the cleaners, the H value was about 1.265 (which in this 
family, represents about 6% of the members). 
Some families were analyzed only with one species counting as a cleaner species, 
such as Coraciidae, Cuculidae and Furnariidae. But still, it seems that there is a tendency that 
the cleaner species have a more diverse diet, when compared with other species in their 
families. With Furnariidae, for example, the H mean value was about 0.113 without the 
cleaners (which in this family, represents about 99.5% of the members) but, if only considering 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4744
 
 
 
 
SciELO Preprints - preprints.scielo.org 
7 
the cleaner species, the H value was about 0.5 (which in this family, represents about 0.45% 
of the members). All values can be found in Supplementary fig. 1 b).   
  
 
 
Figure 3 Paired T-Test of the mean diet (Shannon’s Diversity Index) of families. Each line 
represents a different family. <Hf>  represents the mean diversity values of families without 
cleaners. <Hc> represents the mean diversity values only of cleaners in the same given family. 
The red lines represent the families that demonstrated a positive tendency, where mean H 
values in cleaners were higher than H values of non-cleaner bird species of the same given 
family.  
Mean: 0.262012; Std Dev: 0.3775; T test: 3.5386; P > t: 0.0008; N: 26 
 
(b) Cleaning networks and centrality degree 
Based on Sazima et al. 2012 and Mikula et al. 2017, we reconstructed the networks of cleaning 
interactions of Brazil (Pantanal) and Africa, using a heat map to identify the diet diversity index 
of each bird species (Fig. 4). Also, the size of nodes represents the centrality degree of these 
networks (bigger nodes represent bird species that interact with a higher diversity of host 
species).  
Analyzing the centrality degree of birds in the networks and the H value of the bird species, 
there is no obvious relation between H and the values of centrality degree, meaning there is 
no significant results attesting that those values are correlated (Fig. 5).   
   
Figure 4 a)  
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4744
 
 
 
 
SciELO Preprints - preprints.scielo.org 
8 
 
Figure 4 b)  
 
Figure 4 The colored nodes represent the bird species and their H value, gray nodes represent 
mammal species cleaned by birds. Links represent cleaning interactions. The size of the 
colored nodes represents the centrality degree. The heat map represents the values of H, 
where hot colors represent higher values and cold colors represent lower values. a) South 
America’s cleaning network, based on Sazima et al. 2012. b) Africa’s cleaning network, based 
on Mikula et al. 2017. 
Figure 5 a) 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4744
 
 
 
 
SciELO Preprints - preprints.scielo.org 
9 
 
Figure 5 b)  
 
Figure 5 The color of the plots represent the values of H, where hot colors represent higher 
values and cold colors represent lower values. The regression lines don't exhibit significant 
tendencies. a) South America’s cleaning scatter plot; R2 = 0.01766; p > 0.05 b) Africa’s 
cleaning scatter plot; R2 = 0.01307; p > 0.05. 
Discussion 
Cleaning interactions among birds and mammals exhibit a great diversity of species 
and contexts. Analyzing two different networks, of different sizes and different locations, we 
could identify patterns in a facultative interaction from a broader perspective. Species with a 
wide repertoire of consumption could potentially engage in different types of interactions, such 
as facultative interactions like cleaning symbiosis. Once the bird is exposed to an opportunity, 
here defined as the presence of a mammal that hosts food resources, the ability to use this 
opportunity is defined by the species natural history. Our results suggest that for the majority 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4744
 
 
 
 
SciELO Preprints - preprints.scielo.org 
10 
of cleaners, the ability to consume different types of resources is an important feature to 
engage in cleaning interactions. Because the diversity of consumption is important for 
engaging in the interactions, a structural pattern such as centrality degree could also be 
influenced by the diversity of consumption. The purpose of this analysis is to understand the 
implications of resource consumption in the community. The network centrality degree 
analysis shows that there is no relation between the centrality degree and the diet diversity 
index of bird species. Which means that the ability of consuming different types of resources 
do not influence the centrality of the species in the network.  
Opportunism is a common behavior between bird species. For example, caracaras 
(Falconidae) consume a myriad of types of resources, such as fruits, carcasses and eventually 
arthropods. These birds have been seen interacting with a diverse group of mammals, which 
raises the idea that they can have a central role in the community network. The caracaras are 
not only generalists in consumption, but also generalists in interactions with different host 
species. But, caracaras are an exception to the average opportunistic behavior in cleaning 
interactions, considering that there is no significant correlation between centrality degree and 
diversity of diet. The absence of a significant correlation suggests that there is more than one 
dimension when referring to generalism and specialism behaviors. Indeed, there are different 
levels of organization that can shape the biodiversity patterns (Levin, 1992). Some cleaner 
birds are generalists in the networks, when considering the different species of hosts, but in a 
broader perspective of consumption they are specialized. Some species, like the Oxpeckers 
(Buphagus sp.), specialized in cleaning interactions, in a way that they consume only parasites 
that live in large mammals. They are central to the network, demonstrating generalistic 
associations between different species of mammals, but specialized in consuming small 
arthropods that live in these mammals. Although these parasites can have a range of 
differences in morphologies and physiologies, compared to other categories of food resources 
the Oxpeckers can be defined as a specialist in consumption. Which means that the 
opportunistic behavior, although being essential to engagement in facultative interactions, can 
lead to specialized behavior. A strategy that can lead to an intimate relationship between the 
cleaners and even some of their most frequent hosts.  
These individuals rely on the resources provided by the network (here, arthropods, 
injured tissue or blood) and not on particular hosts. These highly connected species are 
termed supergeneralists (Jordano et al. 2003, Thompson 2005). They have extremely 
specialized lifestyles that depend on the network they are embedded to survive. As the 
supergeneralists occur in the community, they tend to be relatively more important than others 
for maintaining structure and functioning of the community. The specialization of diet in a 
central species is not a unique pattern of cleaning networks, since dietary specialization occurs 
in other supergeneralists. For example, the centrality in seed-dispersal networks happens in 
species that present a higher centrality degree. Furthermore, centrality was best explained by 
dietary specialization (Mello et al. 2014).  
Here, we have analyzed the structure of interactions and the natural history of bird species in 
facultative interactions, aiming to unravel the complexity of bird-mammal cleaning 
communities. Although the history of resources consumed and the centrality degree are 
important to comprehend the patterns of interactions, each one of them plays a different role 
in the composition of the community. In a broader perspective, these results suggest that the 
factors that may allow species to participate in ecological community networks are not the 
same factors that modulate their role in the same networks. Other factors, such as species 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4744
 
 
 
 
SciELO Preprints - preprints.scielo.org 
11 
abundance, can determine degree centrality. Thus, the role of species does not depend on a 
global structural generalism. But specifically, the role of species depends on their natural 
history and their integration into different types of interactions. 
References 
(1) 
The 
Cornell 
Lab 
of 
Ornithology 
“Birds 
of 
the 
World”, 
2019. 
Disponível 
em:<https://birdsoftheworld.org/bow/home> . Acesso em: 18/01/2021  
(2) Wilman, H., Belmaker, J., Simpson, J., de la Rosa, C., Rivadeneira, M.M., Jetz, W., 2014. 
“EltonTraits 1.0: species-level foraging attributes of the world's birds and mammals” ecological 
archives E095–178. Ecology 95, 2027. 
(3) Sazima, Cristina, et al. "Cleaning associations between birds and herbivorous mammals 
in Brazil: structure and complexity." The Auk 129.1 (2012): 36-43. 
(4) Mikula, Peter, et al. "Large-scale assessment of commensalistic–mutualistic associations 
between African birds and herbivorous mammals using internet photos." PeerJ 6 (2018): 
e4520. 
(5) Sazima, Cristina, et al. "What makes a species central in a cleaning mutualism network?." 
Oikos 119.8 (2010): 1319-1325. 
(6) Sazima, Ivan. "Cleaner birds: a worldwide overview." Revista Brasileira de Ornitologia 
(2011). 
(7) Fonseca, C. R. & Ganade, G. (1996). Asymmetries, compartments and null interactions in 
an Amazonian ant-plant community. J. Anim. Ecol., 65, 339-347. 
(8) Lewinsohn, T. M., Prado, P. I., Jordano, P., Bascompte, J., Olesen, J. M. (2006). Structure 
in plant-animal interaction assemblages. Oikos, 113(1), 174-184. 
(9) Guimarães, P. R., Rico-Gray, V., Oliveira, P. S., Izzo, T. J., dos Reis, S. F. & Thompson, 
J. N. (2007). Interaction Intimacy Affects Structure and Coevolutionary Dynamics in Mutualistic 
Networks. Curr. Biol., 17, 1797- 1803. 
(10) Sazima, Ivan, and Cristina Sazima. "Cleaner birds: an overview for the Neotropics." Biota 
Neotropica 10.4 (2010): 195-203. 
(11) Sazima, Ivan, and Cristina Sazima. "Brazilian cleaner birds: update and brief reappraisal." 
Biota Neotropica 10.1 (2010): 327-331.  
(12)  Guimarães Jr, Paulo R. ; Sazima, Cristina ; dos Reis, Sérgio Furtado ; and Sazima, Ivan 
“The nested structure of marine cleaning symbiosis: is it like flowers and bees?” Biol. Lett. 
(2007) 3, 51–54 
(13)  Thompson, Andrew R. ; Adam, Thomas C. ; Hultgren, Kristin M. ; and Thacker, Christine 
E. “Ecology and Evolution Affect Network Structure in an Intimate Marine Mutualism.” The 
American Naturalist, Vol. 182, No. 2 (August 2013): E58-E72 
(14) Levin, S. A. (1992). The problem of pattern and scale in ecology: The Robert H. MacArthur 
Award lecture. Ecology, 73, 1943-1967. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4744
 
 
 
 
SciELO Preprints - preprints.scielo.org 
12 
(15) Bascompte, J., Jordano, P., Melián, C. J., & Olesen, J. M. (2003). The nested assembly 
of plant–animal mutualistic networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
100(16), 9383-9387. 
(16) Jordano, P., Bascompte, J., & Olesen, J. M. (2003). Invariant properties in coevolutionary 
networks of plant–animal interactions. Ecology letters, 6(1), 69-81. 
(17) Jordano, P. (2016). Sampling networks of ecological interactions. Functional Ecology, 
30(12), 1883-1893. 
(18)  Thompson, J. N. (2005). The geographic mosaic of coevolution. In The geographic 
mosaic of coevolution. University of Chicago Press. 
(19) Mello, M. A. R., Rodrigues, F. A., Costa, L. D. F., Kissling, W. D., Şekercioğlu, Ç. H., 
Marquitti, F. M. D., & Kalko, E. K. V. (2015). Keystone species in seed dispersal networks are 
mainly determined by dietary specialization. Oikos, 124(8), 1031-1039. 
(20) MacArthur, R. (1955). Fluctuations of animal populations and a measure of community 
stability. ecology, 36(3), 533-536. 
(21) Drossel, B. (2001). Biological evolution and statistical physics. Advances in physics, 
50(2), 209-295. 
(22) Guimarães Jr, P. R., Jordano, P., & Thompson, J. N. (2011). Evolution and coevolution 
in mutualistic networks. Ecology letters, 14(9), 877-885. 
(23) Paine, R. T. (1966). Food web complexity and species diversity. The American Naturalist, 
100(910), 65-75. 
(24) Fontaine, C., Dajoz, I., Meriguet, J., & Loreau, M. (2006). Functional diversity of plant–
pollinator interaction webs enhances the persistence of plant communities. PLoS biology, 4(1), 
e1. 
(25) Hale, K. R., Valdovinos, F. S., & Martinez, N. D. (2020). Mutualism increases diversity, 
stability, and function of multiplex networks that integrate pollinators into food webs. Nature 
communications, 11(1), 1-14. 
(26) Pascual, M., Dunne, J. A., & Dunne, J. A. (Eds.). (2006). Ecological networks: linking 
structure to dynamics in food webs. Oxford University Press. 
(27) Pires, M. M., & Guimaraes Jr, P. R. (2013). Interaction intimacy organizes networks of 
antagonistic interactions in different ways. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 10(78), 
20120649. 
(28) Verdú, M., Jordano, P., & Valiente‐ Banuet, A. (2010). The phylogenetic structure of plant 
facilitation networks changes with competition. Journal of Ecology, 98(6), 1454-1461. 
(29) Guimaraes Jr, P. R., Sazima, C., Reis, S. F. D., & Sazima, I. (2007). The nested structure 
of marine cleaning symbiosis: is it like flowers and bees?. Biology Letters, 3(1), 51-54. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4744
 
 
 
 
SciELO Preprints - preprints.scielo.org 
13 
(30) Olesen, J. M., Bascompte, J., Dupont, Y. L., & Jordano, P. (2007). The modularity of 
pollination networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(50), 19891-
19896. 
(31) Pimm, S. L., Lawton, J. H., & Cohen, J. E. (1991). Food web patterns and their 
consequences. Nature, 350(6320), 669-674. 
(32) Guimarães, P. R. (2020). The structure of ecological networks across levels of 
organization. Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics, 51(1), 433-460. 
(33) Bastolla, U., Fortuna, M. A., Pascual-García, A., Ferrera, A., Luque, B., & Bascompte, J. 
(2009). The architecture of mutualistic networks minimizes competition and increases 
biodiversity. Nature, 458(7241), 1018-1020. 
(34) Olesen, J. M., Bascompte, J., Dupont, Y. L., Elberling, H., Rasmussen, C., & Jordano, P. 
(2011). Missing and forbidden links in mutualistic networks. Proceedings of the Royal Society 
B: Biological Sciences, 278(1706), 725-732. 
(35) Kuebbing, S., Rodriguez-Cabal, M. A., Fowler, D., Breza, L., Schweitzer, J. A., & Bailey, 
J. K. (2013). Resource availability and plant diversity explain patterns of invasion of an exotic 
grass. Journal of Plant Ecology, 6(2), 141-149. 
(36) Pekkonen, M., Ketola, T., & Laakso, J. T. (2013). Resource availability and competition 
shape the evolution of survival and growth ability in a bacterial community. PLoS One, 8(9), 
e76471. 
(37) Vázquez, D. P., Melián, C. J., Williams, N. M., Blüthgen, N., Krasnov, B. R., & Poulin, R. 
(2007). Species abundance and asymmetric interaction strength in ecological networks. 
Oikos, 116(7), 1120-1127. 
(38) Vázquez, D. P., Poulin, R., Krasnov, B. R., & Shenbrot, G. I. (2005). Species abundance 
and the distribution of specialization in host-parasite interaction networks. Journal of Animal 
Ecology, 946-955. 
(39) Lewinsohn, T. M., Inácio Prado, P., Jordano, P., Bascompte, J., & M. Olesen, J. (2006). 
Structure in plant–animal interaction assemblages. Oikos, 113(1), 174-184. 
(40) Krishna, Y. C., Krishnaswamy, J., & Kumar, N. S. (2008). Habitat factors affecting site 
occupancy and relative abundance of four‐ horned antelope. Journal of Zoology, 276(1), 63-
70 
Authors' contribution statement  
J.N.A and P.R.G conceptualized the ideas, P.R.G. did the supervision, J.N.A performed the 
data curation, J.N.A did the investigation, formal analysis and methodology. J.N.A and 
P.R.G. wrote the original draft, P.R.G did the review and editing.  
Conflict of interest statement 
The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest. 
Research data availability statement 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4744
 
 
 
 
SciELO Preprints - preprints.scielo.org 
14 
The entire dataset supporting the results of this study was made available at SciELO Data 
and can be accessed at [https://doi.org/10.48331/scielodata.BLC2ZW]. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4744
This preprint was submitted under the following conditions: 
The authors declare that they are aware that they are solely responsible for the content of the preprint and
that the deposit in SciELO Preprints does not mean any commitment on the part of SciELO, except its
preservation and dissemination.
The authors declare that the necessary Terms of Free and Informed Consent of participants or patients in
the research were obtained and are described in the manuscript, when applicable.
The authors declare that the preparation of the manuscript followed the ethical norms of scientific
communication.
The authors declare that the data, applications, and other content underlying the manuscript are
referenced.
The deposited manuscript is in PDF format.
The authors declare that the research that originated the manuscript followed good ethical practices and
that the necessary approvals from research ethics committees, when applicable, are described in the
manuscript.
The authors declare that once a manuscript is posted on the SciELO Preprints server, it can only be taken
down on request to the SciELO Preprints server Editorial Secretariat, who will post a retraction notice in its
place.
The authors agree that the approved manuscript will be made available under a Creative Commons CC-BY
license.
The submitting author declares that the contributions of all authors and conflict of interest statement are
included explicitly and in specific sections of the manuscript.
The authors declare that the manuscript was not deposited and/or previously made available on another
preprint server or published by a journal.
If the manuscript is being reviewed or being prepared for publishing but not yet published by a journal, the
authors declare that they have received authorization from the journal to make this deposit.
The submitting author declares that all authors of the manuscript agree with the submission to SciELO
Preprints.
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
