SARS-Cov-2 is a virus easily transmitted by air and fomites causing  acute severe 
respiratory syndrome. Severity in some cases requires hospitalization and complex 
expensive intensive care treatments. Its rampant contagious led to a a fearful pandemic 
affecting the whole world with millions of infected humans and almost half a million 
deaths in a few months in the beginning of 2020 (until June 17, 2020). SARS-Cov2 is likely 
to have been spilled over from natural sylvatic cycles in bats from China. 

Our purpose is to comment on the human individual immune inflammatory responses to 
the infection of SARS-Cov2 and the reflections of these individual immunoinflammatory 
profiles on patterns of the severity of the disease, time for therapeutical intervention, 
pathogenesis, candidate drugs and indicative comparative drug prices for covid-19. 

Efficient treatment  for covid-19 may require: 1) early disease detection, 2) a combination 
of drugs being used for 3) targeting the virus replication cycle and 4) specific/ 
individualized drug treatment for given immunoinflammatory human profile responses in 
a 5) timely manner. 

Specific serum immuno-markers of covid-19 affected individuals at onset, in the follow-up, 
and in the resolution of the immunoinflammatory storm during the course of the disease 
may lead to individualized therapeutics with better outcomes.  

Covid-19 is unlikely to be the last emergent human disease with fast pandemic potencial. 
To gather knowledge on the human host profiles and immunoinflamatory responses is an 
opportunity that could pave the way to faster, more efficient strategies to tackle upcoming 
diseases. 

We are all different. We are 7 billion of humans with differently arranged DNA 
material. Upon an incredible variety contained in 3 billion DNA base pairs,  the way we 
live, work, eat, exercise and even, our mental health add variation to our epigenetics. 

Even though this is an established fact, when we talk about pathogen invasion and 
emerging diseases we tend to disregard our immense human genetics and epigenetic 
variation. In fact, these variations lead to different host immune responses to pathogen 
infection and to the way human populations and cohorts are impacted. 

In the beginning of the 1960’s John Murray Last, an Australian doctor, while working as a 
postgraduate in the London Hospital, UK, observed what he called ‘subclinical diseases’ 
and created the strong metaphorical image of ‘disease as iceberg’ observing that only a 
fraction of patients show symptoms in a given exposed population (Last 1963 ) (Figure 1). 
Last observed these subclinical undetected forms either for acute or chronic diseases such 
as urinary infections, tuberculosis and for diabetes and rheumatoid arthritis, among 
others, stating that the ‘Disease known to the general practitioner represents only the tip of 
the iceberg’.  In the tip visible part of the iceberg, a few individuals present medium to 
severe symptoms while for some individuals, in fact the majority of the affected 
population, mild or no symptoms prevail. 

For covid-19, caused by the number 2 coronavirus - SARS-CoV2, the number of severe 
cases seem to follow the iceberg model of disease (Fig. 1) (Table I). Even though testing 
and notifications are believed to confirm only a fraction of the coronavirus infections 
actually happening, 0.0o1 to ~ 1% of cases in the total population could still be confirmed 
using fast immunochromatographic tests for antibodies and polymerase chain reaction-
PCR antigen testing (Table I). These numbers will be considered by us as a proxy of 
individuals having moderate to severe symptoms, seeking testing in hospitals and health 
care units and being statistically registered. Testing studies in 120 cities in Brazil 
corresponding to 32.7% of the total Brazilian population, or 68.6 million individuals have 
shown average percentages of 3% of infected individuals sometimes completely 
assymptomatic (EPICOVID19 -Universidade de Pelotas, data of 11 June 2020 ). These 
numbers are highly variable showing different realities for different Brazilian cities. In 
some capitals tests showed IgM positive for covid-19 raging from 0.5% in most cities of the 
Southern Brazilian States to 25% in Boa Vista, Roraima in the Northern Region 
(EPICOVID19 -Universidade de Pelotas, data of 11 June 2020). 

These numbers look small. Nonetheless, they are still of concern and challenge even for the 
most prepared health systems, since covid-19 is a fast spreading contagious acute 
respiratory syndrome which requires complex treatment involving intensive care units, 
ventilators and other special equipment, high use of disposable consumables and highly 
skilled personnel, all ready at once. Some patients require intensive care for weeks and 
approximately 1 to 16% of those symptomatic individuals will not recover (Table I). 

Individual immune responses. When we look retrospectively to a new emerging 
pathogen such as the severe acute respiratory syndrome by SARS-CoV2, individual 
exacerbated immunoinflamatory responses in attempt to overcome the pathogen invasion 
seem to be linked to the symptomatic full blown covid-19 disease . These responses are not 
only likely to vary on individual fashion but also during covid-19 time progression and are 
linked to disease outcomes.   

Comorbidities and risk groups alone can not by itself explain covid-19 clinic presentation 
segmentation in a given population, from mild to severe. Although the elderly, 
hypertensive, diabetic, obese, immunosupressed and chronically ill are majorly at risk, as 
for any infection, some healthy individuals in the population seem to be more susceptible 
to develop covid-19 severe cases.  These severe covid-19 cases are usually linked with 
clinics presentation of a ‘cytokine storm’. 

Out of control. Unregulated immune-inflammation is a central pathological process in 
several infectious diseases such as haemorrhagic dengue (Sierra et al 2010 ) and severe 
malaria (Penha-Gonçalves 2019 ). 

The term ‘cytokine storm’ was first used in 1993 on a paper on graft-versus-host disease 
(Ferrara et al 1993 ). Cytokine storm phenomenon was applied for the avian H5N1 
influenza virus, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus-associated hemophagocytic 
lymphohistiocytosis, group A streptococcus, variola virus and for the previous severe acute 
respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) (reviewed in Tisoncik et al 2012). Cytokine 
storm was revived for covid-19 since its striking immune-inflammatories cellular and 
molecular processes seem to be strongly linked with death outcomes (Fig. 2). 

Immunoinflammatory profiles. We would expect that genetics, immune and 
inflammatory profiles of each infected individual play a role in the outcome for covid-19 
but we have just started gathering knowledge to have the tools to separate these 
individuals  in groups and take this knowledge to the clinics. These profiles are not static in 
time and ought to be dependent on the genetics and epigenetics of the individuals. 

We therefore would like to suggest at least three major human immunoprofile groups for 
covid-19 which can be applied to other cytokine storm prone-diseases: 1) individuals who 
will probably not develop a cytokine storm, 2) those who potentially will make a storm and 
3) those will most likely will make a storm.  These 3 major groups could be separated based 
on: i) the ratio nucleocytes/ monocytes (Tay et al 2020), ii) interleucin-6 - IL-6 levels and 
iii) immunoinflamatory factors such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF-a), interferon gamma 
(IFN-c) and tumor grow factor beta (TGF-b) and other interleukins such as IL-10, IL-2, 
IL-4 and IL-5 (Sierra et al 2010, Tay et al 2020). Better laboratory indicators of factors 
present in the blood serum will most likely help to better outcome predictions using fast 
practical approaches. 

If we could know more about the specific immune and inflammatory responses of each 
individual we would be in a better position to understand risk groups. Genetic and 
epigenetic factors are not only important for infectious pathogens such as bacteria and 
viruses but also for several degenerative conditions, from endometriosis (Bellelis et al 
2019 , Garcia-Goméz et al 2020 ) to senility (Hu et al 2019 ). 

Hence, the categorization of human immunoinflammatory profiles would also allow for 
better therapeutics. 

Possible suitable times for drug intervention in covid-19 are represented by red arrows in 
Figure 2: a) early (probably using antivirals), b) symptomatic (probably using anti-
inflammatory drugs) and c) storm (probably using MAbs and corticoids) (Fig.2). 
Possible drugs for covid-19.  As an emerging disease, there are no drugs tested for 
covid-19. Time and money are required in order for a drug, or a vaccine, to reach shelves’s 
pharmacies and hospitals. In fact, from 5-10 years in tests from drug discovery in the 
laboratory to 3 phases of clinical research in animal and human populations of increasing 
sizes is required. With such complex from bench to bed pathways, a single drug costs from 
tens to hundreds of millions of dollars to be available to the society. Often, treatment for a 
disease, even if it exists, cannot be applied until it is authorized, registered and regulated. 
For a deadly highly contagious disease as covid-19, the repositioning of drugs is the 
emergency strategy indicated in the integrated management of the pandemic. 

The first drugs that come to mind are antivirals, because covid-19 is caused by a virus. 
Directly linked cell destruction and tissue damage is likely to be linked to the virus 
pathogenesis mechanisms. However, we must ask ourselves if the human host response is 
the cause for the major burden to the infected organism in covid-19. Due to the urgency, 
repositioning of drugs have been proposed as a viable way to tackle covid-19. All these 
drugs are already on the market and safely used to treat other diseases. Some anti-
inflammatory drugs have also been used to experimentally treat covid-19.  

Knowledge of inflammation pathways and triggers provide opportunities for therapeutic 
targets.  

Tackle inflammation as well as viral infection would better manage homeostasis in the 
moderate to high immunoinflammatory profile group likely to present a heavier illness. 

Among the many pathological mechanisms studied and reviewed to date in covid-19 are: 1) 
direct attack of the viral particle on the lung tissue with cell destruction at the exit after 
replication (Tang & Kang 2020 ); 2) dissociation of the hemoglobin structure producing 
iron and porphyrin (Wenzhong & Hualan 2020 ); 3) uncontrolled/ exacerbated 
inflammatory responses (Fig.3) which may cause a series of blood related pathologies such 
as ischemia, tissue destruction of organs like heart, brain, kidneys and lungs (Dhama et al 
2020 ). 

Among the drugs tested against covid-19 are: antiviral drugs (favipiravir, remdesivir, 
lopinavir, ritonavir, ribavirin, oseltamivir), aminoquinolonas (cloroquina 
and 
hidroxicloroquina), monoclonal antibodies (sarilumab, tocilizumab, anti-cytokynes such as 
anti-IL-6), immune-plasma (plasma from recovered patients), plasma with inflammation 
regulatory factors (PlasmaCord ®), antibiotics (azytromycin), anti-helminthic  
(nitazoxanide),  corticosteroids, immunomodulators (interferon) and other classes  of 
drugs (camostat) (Table II, prices are given comparatively per 100 mg whenever possible). 

Vaccines. Currently there are more than 135 clinical trials on SARS-CoV-2. Vaccines 
demand a long way from lab to society with usually 4 phases: preclinical (with non-human 
animal testing) and phases I (safety), II (expanded), III (efficacy) to approval (WHO 
2020 , New York Times 2020 ). These vaccine candidates have different designs to allow 
33
34
humans to produce antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 such as: ‘self-amplifying RNA; vectors 
using chimpanzee adenovirus ChAdOx1, adenovirus Ad26, adeno-associated virus 
delivering coronavirus gene fragments into cells (gene therapy), vesicular stomatitis 
viruses; protein-based molecules; whole attenuated viral particles and the repurposed 
tuberculosis vaccine (WHO 2020, New York Times 2020). Even using fast, combined 
approaches in an unforeseen fashion, a vaccine for covid-19 will be ready to market only at 
the end of 2020/ yearly 2021. Billions of doses will have to be manufactured, shipped and 
available to cover the whole world. 

SARS-CoV-2 is highly contagious, being easily transmitted by air and fomites and some 
cases’ severity require hospitalization and complex expensive intensive care treatments.  

Some individuals in the population seem to be more susceptible to covid-19 and risk 
groups such as the elderly, hypertensive, diabetic, obese and with other comorbidities have 
been majorly affected by covid-19.  It might  also be that the genetic, immune and 
inflammatory profile of each infected individual play a role in the outcome of the covid-19 
disease helping to form the iceberg presentation of the disease (Last 2013). If we knew 
more about the specific immune and inflammatory response of each individual we would 
be in a better position to talk about risk groups, since these genetic and epigenetic factors 
are not only important for viruses, but for several degenerative conditions, from 
endometriosis to senility. 

Unregulated inflammation is a central pathological process in several infectious and non-
infectious diseases. Knowledge of inflammation pathways provides opportunities for 
therapeutic targets. 

Efficient treatment  for covid-19 may require: 1) early detection 2) a combination of drugs 
being used for 3) targeting the virus replication cycle, for 4) specific/ individualized 
treatment for specific immunoinflamatory human profiles/ responses in a 5) timely 
manner. 

Specific immuno-markers of covid-19 present in human serum at onset, in the follow-up, 
and in the resolution of the immunoinflammatory storm may lead us to individualized 
therapeutics with better outcomes.  

Pathogens transmission cycles in nature between non-human hosts, vectors and pathogens 
often leave these cycles in a phenomenon called spillover, or 'spill out of the cycle', 
reaching the human host. Several of the recently observed emerging and reemerging 
diseases such as Zika or yellow fever, have so happened. 

Serious acute respiratory syndromes have recently occurred caused by two other 
coronaviruses spilled over from sylvatic cycles (Fig.3). The first coronavirus was the SARS-
CoV with 8096 infected people and 774 deaths in various countries in Asia, Africa, Europe 
and America during 2002-2003. The second coronavirus was MERS-CoV (Middle East 
respiratory syndrome coronavirus) an outbreak in 2012 circumscribed to Southeast Asia 
and the Middle East. MERS-COV was registered in 26 countries, with 1621 confirmed cases 
and 584 deaths globally   (World Health Organization-WHO, December 7, 2015) where it 
could probably have again secluded to sylvatic cycles having camels as reservoirs . 

Besides new emerging diseases, in recent years we have experienced pandemics of 
reemerging old diseases such as dengue, yellow fever, Zika, chikungunya and even measles 
for which a vaccine is available.  

Covid-19 is unlikely to be the last rampant emergent human disease. To gather knowledge 
on the human host profiles and immunoinflamatory responses to infectious diseases  is an 
opportunity-to-learn that could lead to faster, more efficient ways to tackle ever 
challenging human emerging diseases. 
