The rehabilitation with dental prostheses of Indigenous people edentulous put in 
villages has been a challenge for the institutions responsible for Indigenous health care in view 
of the difficult logistics of displacement of Indigenous people to urban centers. Retrospective 
observational study. Nineteen edentulous indigenous people were rehabilitated by the 
simplified technique “Prosthesis in one day”. Before making the prosthesis (t0), the patients 
were submitted to a clinical examination and interview for the application of the OHIP-14. 
Prostheses Adjustments prostheses were made when necessary. After one year (t1), a new 
interview was conducted and in addition to questionnaires to assess the quality of life, one was 
applied to evaluate the perception of quality, comfort and chewing ability in relation to the 
prostheses. There was a significant decrease in oral health impact on patients' quality of life in 
all OHIP-14 domains (median t0 = 33.0; median t1 = 0.0; effect size = 4.69). In general, the 
scores given by patients for the upper and lower dentures were high after one year of use. There 
was a positive impact on chewing. The “Prosthesis in 1 day” technique proved to be a good 
alternative for the rehabilitation of villagers, positively impacting their quality of life. 

Indigenous Brazilians are made up of different peoples, who have lived in the country 
since before  the Portuguese colonization1. At this time, it was estimated that indigenous 
populations totaled around five million people2, although these numbers have suffered drastic 
reductions over the centuries, due to the affliction by diseases brought by Europeans and 
conflicts with colonizers. The last census conducted by IBGE (the Brazilian Institute of 
Geography and Statistics) in 2010 found there were 896,900 indigenous people in the country, 
from 305 ethnic groups, speaking 274 languages1. 

The Brazilian Federal Constitution and the Organic Health Laws (Law No. 
8,080/1990 and Law No. 9,836/1999) recognize the specific ethnic and cultural characteristics 
of indigenous peoples. The health of the indigenous population requires a complementary and 
targeted model of services aimed at the protection, promotion and recovery of health3,4, detailed 
in the National Policy for the Health Care of Indigenous Peoples4 and in the Guidelines of the 
Indigenous Component of the National Oral Health Policy5,6. The purpose of these policies is 
to guarantee comprehensive care in accordance with the principles and guidelines of the 
National Health Service (or SUS), respecting social, cultural, geographical, historical and 
political diversity, and recognizing the effectiveness of traditional medicine, to overcome 
factors that make this population more vulnerable to health problems. 

At the same time, there is a high prevalence of edentulism among the public health 
problems in Brazil, especially in older individuals and residents in the north of the country, 
followed by the northeast7. Among the indigenous population, the prevalence of edentulism is 
even higher than in the general population8,9.  

While it is recommended that edentulism is treated in Primary Care, this treatment has 
been commonly performed in specialized care, through the installation of removable complete 
dentures, the manufacturing processes of which comprise five sessions involving clinical 
procedures, followed by laboratory procedures. Such techniques for the manufacture of 
complete dentures, spread over five sessions, are also recommended by the Ministry of Health, 
through a manual entitled Oral Health in the National Health Service10, and must be carried out 
in Basic Health Units or in Specialist Dental Centers, according to the organization of the 
municipal region. 

The Pataxó indigenous people live in the extreme south of the state of Bahia, in 36 
villages, distributed over six indigenous lands: Águas Belas, Aldeia Velha, Barra Velha, 
Imbiriba, Coroa Vermelha and Mata Medonha - located in the municipal regions of Santa Cruz 
Cabrália, Porto Seguro, Itamaraju and Prado. Aldeia Velha, located in Arraial D'Ajuda, in the 
municipal region of Porto Seguro, covers an area of 2010 hectares, 80% of which is native 
forest, and a mangrove area of approximately 10 km². Data from the Indigenous Health Care 
Information System (or SIASI) recorded, in 2010, 11,436 inhabitants in 19 of these villages, 
with 928 inhabitants in Aldeia Velha11.  

According to the 2016 annual management report12, due to structural and logistical 
issues, the movement of indigenous people to urban centers is difficult or even impossible, 
which, together with the scarcity or even lack of specialized services in the vicinities of 
indigenous villages, makes prosthetic rehabilitation procedures for the indigenous population 
of the Special Indigenous Health District – Bahia (or DSEI Bahia) almost non-existent. The 
demand for prosthetic services in the region is much higher than the installed capacity. 

Based on the complexity of conventional techniques for making dentures, which 
involves five clinical and laboratory sessions, assisting indigenous villagers with their dentures 
needs is extremely difficult. It is therefore essential that simplified techniques of prosthetic 
rehabilitation, which have been found to be effective, are used for the oral rehabilitation of this 
population. Randomized, controlled and blind studies have shown that simplified techniques 
are capable of producing comparable results to traditional denture-making techniques, based on 
both patient satisfaction and the quality of the dentures13,14. The simplified technique has a 
lower cost and shorter clinical/laboratory period and is able to restore masticatory function to a 
level comparable to the conventional protocol, as well as improving oral health related quality 
of life15,16,17.  

Although techniques simplified to three and four sessions have already been 
described13,18,19, these methods also create difficulties, as they require the transport of the 
indigenous peoples to urban centers.  

In this context, the Dentures in One Day Technique was proposed, based on four basic 
pillars. The first consists of the use of prefabricated, flexible dental arches with adjustable teeth 
(patent PI0602107-7 B1). With this technology, the artificial teeth are pre-assembled on a 
flexible support base made of acrylic elastomeric material, capable of three-dimensional 
movement. The flexibility of the elastomer allows the base to be adapted to the patient's 
anatomy, and the set of upper and lower teeth to be assembled at the same time. The base 
material also allows the position of the teeth to be adjusted individually, in case the correction 
of aesthetic, phonetic or occlusal problems is required. The bases of the prefabricated dental 
arches are made of temporary material, which is completely removed during the acrylization of 
the dentures and is replaced by heat activated acrylic resin (HAAR) based on poly (methyl 
methacrylate) (PMMA). 

The second pillar is the application of a simplified technique, involving making and 
installing the parts of the dentures on the same day. In the morning, patients undergo the taking 
of anatomical and functional impressions, intermaxillary registration, and assembly and testing 
of the arches. In the afternoon, the laboratory processing stages are carried out, which include 
muffle inclusion, acrylization of the thermally activated acrylic resin in the microwave, and 
finishing and polishing, so that at the end of the day, patients receive the complete conventional 
dentures.  

The third pillar involves a mini laboratory with equipment necessary for the acrylic 
and finishing steps, as well as the availability of a dental technician with experience in resin. 
For the dentures to be made on the same day, it is necessary for the prosthetic technician works 
together with the dental surgeon, to synchronize the procedures, so that processing is quicker. 

The fourth pillar involves the creation of the final product, with the prosthetic 
apparatus received by the patient taking the form of dentures pressed in heat-polymerized 
acrylic resin, by placement in a plastic muffle using a silicone barrier, pressing in a hydraulic 
press and a microwave polymerization cycle, followed by finishing and polishing. 

For the Dentures in One Day campaign, a partnership agreement was signed between 
the Special Indigenous Health District - Bahia, the Special Secretariat for Indigenous Health - 
Ministry of Health, Inova/UNICAMP and the Faculdade São Leopoldo Mandic (São Leopoldo 
Mandic University) (Campinas, São Paulo). 

The present study was carried out to assess the impact on the quality of life of the 
rehabilitated indigenous people and their perception of general satisfaction, chewing ability and 
quality of dentures made in the first “Dentures in One Day/Special Indigenous Health District 
- Bahia (DSEI-BA)” campaign in Aldeia Velha, Bahia. 

The research has been approved by the Ethics Committee of the institution responsible 
for the research (Protocol 4.108.212; CAAE: 32615620.6.0000.5374;).  

This observational epidemiological, retrospective cohort study was carried out in Aldeia 
Velha, in the municipal region of Arraial D'Ajuda (Bahia), from 10/01/2018 (first stage) to 
11/29/2019 (fourth stage).  

To implement the Dentures in One Day/DSEI BAHIA campaign, a partnership of 
cooperation was established between the following institutions: 

- Bahia Special Indigenous Health District (DSEI BAHIA) – the federal agency responsible 
for the management of Indigenous Health in the state of Bahia. 

- Special Secretariat for Indigenous Health (SESAI) / Ministry of Health - federal body 
responsible for coordinating and executing the National Policy for Indigenous Healthcare 
in the SUS. 

- Inova / UNICAMP – the UNICAMP innovation agency responsible for managing the 
intellectual property generated at the university and for authorizing the use of the arches 
covered by patent: PI0602107-7 B1 / UNICAMP. 

- Faculdade São Leopoldo Mandic (Campinas, São Paulo) - responsible for the making and 
provision of eighty free pairs of prefabricated dental arches for DSEI Bahia, with twenty 
pairs used in the Aldeia Velha campaign; providing technical and scientific advice for the 
implementation of the project.  

Based on the agreement, theoretical-practical training of six dentists from the DSEI 
Bahia team was carried out by the SLMandic professors for the manufacture of complete 
dentures using the Dentures In One Day technique. Such training was given by a team of three 
professors and lasted 32 hours, during which the participants received technical training for the 
clinical and laboratory stages of denture processing. 

After this, the first “Dentures in One Day/DSEI Bahia” campaign was organized, with 
a duration of five days of activities. During the period, the dentures were made in a clinical 
environment assembled at the Cultural Center, where five pairs of dentists from DSEI Bahia 
worked, using portable equipment and school tables. Laboratory services were performed by 
two dental dentures technicians, who worked in an attached mini laboratory. The team had three 
indigenous oral health assistants, who were responsible for organizing the environment and 
sterilizing the instruments.  

Among the dentures produced in the joint effort, twenty double or mono-maxillary 
complete dentures were made, using twenty pairs of prefabricated dental arches and two partial 
dentures.  

As part of the actions of the “Dentures in One Day/DSEI Bahia” campaign, all patients 
underwent the following four phases: 

The first consultation, about 45 days before the campaign began, aimed to screen 
indigenous people who required dentures. At this stage, the dentist from the village health team 
performed anamnesis, clinical examinations and selected the group of people to be rehabilitated. 
A semi-structured interview was carried out to analyze problems related to the lack of teeth and 
the expectations regarding the dentures. All patients answered the socio-clinical-demographic 
questionnaire and underwent an initial assessment of quality of life by responding to the OHIP-
14 instrument, a questionnaire that consists of analyzing, through 14 items, seven dimensions: 
functional limitation, physical pain, psychological discomfort, physical disability, 
psychological disability, social disability and handicap. For each of the 14 questions, a five-
point scale was used, where the answer determined the score of each question: Never = 0; 
Almost never = 1; Occasionally = 2; Almost always = 3 and Always = 420.  

The objective was to offer a dental dentures service. During the joint venture, the team of 
dentists from DSEI Bahia, with the support of two prosthetic technicians and the supervision 
of professors from Faculdade São Leopoldo Mandic, made dental dentures for the Pataxó, and 
twenty edentulous patients were rehabilitated using complete dentures. The dentures received 
by the patients in the task force were made of pressed thermally activated acrylic resin. 

This phase sought to carry out proservation, basal and occlusal adjustments and the 
evaluation of the prosthetic services performed. The indigenous people who received prosthetic 
treatment underwent up to four Post-Installation Control and Adjustment sessions, until the 
patient demonstrated they were comfortable with the use of the dentures. Such adjustments 
were made by the village dentist and one of the professors from Faculdade São Leopoldo 
Mandic. 

This was carried out between 25/11/2019 and 29/11/2019, to assess the integrity of the 
mucosa and the hygiene conditions of the dentures. Basal and occlusal adjustments were made, 
as required. Patients answered a questionnaire regarding their satisfaction and chewing ability13 
in relation to the dentures received, and again responded to the OHIP-14 instrument20. 

Data related to satisfaction and masticatory ability were assessed using a questionnaire 
and visual analog scale. The analysis of satisfaction considered: general satisfaction, 
masticatory ability, stability, aesthetics, phonetics, comfort and ease of cleaning. Masticatory 
ability was assessed by the patient's self-perception of chewing the following foods: bread, 
cheese, meat, apples, coconut, carrots, tomatoes and lettuce. Another semi-structured interview 
was carried out, aiming to highlight the degree of patient satisfaction with the dentures, and the 
benefits generated (or not) from their use. 

The data used were based on information obtained through questionnaires and 
interviews of indigenous patients from Aldeia Velha, collected during the Dentures in One 
Day/DSEI Bahia campaign. 

The sample consisted of twenty-two patients located in Aldeia Velha. They were 
included based on the following criteria: of both sexes, totally or partially edentulous, normal 
ridges, good general health, good neuromuscular coordination. Those who were rehabilitated 
with partial dentures and those who could not be in phase IV were excluded. 

Initially, a descriptive analysis of the sample was carried out through the distribution of 
frequencies, measures of central tendency and variability. Since the data did not meet the 
assumptions of parametric analysis, Wilcoxon's nonparametric tests were used to compare the 
impact of oral health on quality of life between the stages (t0 and t1) and to compare patients' 
perception of the upper and lower dentures. The comparison between patients' perception of 
chewing different foods was performed using the Friedman tests. The effect size was calculated. 
All analyzes were performed using the R1program, with a 5% significance level. 

Twenty-two patients were selected in phase I of the project, though one did not attend 
the fabrication of the dentures, two were rehabilitated with partial dentures and one did not 
attend the 1-year reevaluation, stating that he did not use the dentures as he had thought implants 
were to be installed. Thus, based on the exclusion criteria, the present study involved nineteen 
people in phase I (four rehabilitated with upper dentures and fifteen with double dentures) and 
eighteen people in phase IV. 

The average duration of edentulism identified in the sample of the rehabilitated patients 
was 15.3 (± 15.3) years.  Table 1 shows that tooth decay was reported as the cause of tooth loss 
by all patients. Problems with eating and smiling were the most cited problems faced due to 
missing teeth. Among the reasons for not using dentures, financial factors appeared most 
frequently. Finally, among the expectations regarding the dentures to be made in the village, 
the most cited were an expectation to improve one’s smile and to chew better. 

Table 2 shows the impact of oral health on the quality of life of patients declined 
significantly between the stages of the study (p<0.05), with large effect sizes for all domains 
and the total score. 

Table 3 shows the results of the descriptive analysis of the attributed scores of all 
patients after one year of using the dentures (t1), which were generally high. One patient scored 
zero for chewing and the stability and comfort of the lower dentures. The attributed scores for 
chewing, aesthetics and hygiene were significantly lower for lower dentures (p<0.05).  

Table 4 shows the attributed scores for food chewing abilities of all the patients who 
used the dentures. In general, the scores were high, although the same patient who gave a zero 
score for chewing, stability and comfort in the lower dentures, also gave a zero score for the 
ability to chew all foods. 

The prevalence of edentulism among Brazil’s indigenous population is high8,9. The rates 
of tooth loss and the need for dentures in the Pataxó are higher than those of the wider Brazilian 
population21,22. In the current study, dental caries and periodontal disease were cited as the main 
cause of tooth loss, aggravated by the socioeconomic issues faced by indigenous people and the 
invasive characteristics of the public dentistry service20. 

The findings of phase I in relation to the impact of oral health on quality of life agree 
with the assertion that edentulous individuals are physically disabled or incapacitated, due to 
the difficulty they have in eating, speaking and in social interactions23, aspects indicated by the 
respondents as the worst problems arising from a lack of teeth. Of the total number of patients, 
68.4% mentioned difficulty eating and 63.2% reported difficulty smiling as problems caused 
by missing teeth, showing the impact of edentulism on their personal, social and emotional 
quality of life23,24, which also includes speech and chewing impairments25, cited by 31.6% and 
26.3% of volunteers, respectively. Of the total number of patients, 42.1% reported that they did 
not use dentures for financial reasons, corroborating the fact that while prosthetic rehabilitation 
is offered by the Brazilian National Health Service10, the supply may be insufficient to meet 
demand, and a large portion of the population do not have the resources to acquire the same26 
or do not have access to the services offered by the public health system22, difficulties which 
also affect the Pataxó indigenous people of Aldeia Velha. 

In general, whether for logistical or structural reasons, the prosthetic rehabilitation of 
this population has until now been extremely challenging, due to the difficulty in transporting 
patients from the villages to urban centers to undergo treatment22. While DSEI Bahia has 
Primary Oral Health teams in all villages, a dental prosthetics service is not offered. In Aldeia 
Velha, despite its proximity to urban centers, older adults do not leave the village to seek 
prosthetic rehabilitation. 

The measurement tool used to assess the quality of the dentures made in the village was 
a questionnaire, which indicated the level of patient satisfaction and represents the most 
common measurement resource to assess the success of treatment13,27,28. The quality of the 
“dentures in one day” was evaluated positively, if the averages given by patients for the upper 
and lower dentures in criteria such as satisfaction (9.8 and 8.9, respectively), chewing (9.9 and 
8.4, respectively) and stability (9.7 and 8.0, respectively) are considered, corroborating the 
principle that simplified techniques are just as effective as dentures obtained through more 
traditional techniques16. The high scores recorded are possibly because the dentures met the 
expectations of the patients, of which, among the several reported, the most cited were the 
expectation to improve one’s smile and to chew better. According to Owen29 recording 
expectations in relation to comfort, function and aesthetics is fundamental in the pre-treatment 
phase, so that these are observed during the preparation of the dentures. It is also important to 
establish a good relationship between the dentist and the patient30, since the psychological 
aspects of prosthetic therapy are as important as technical factors for the success of the 
treatment31.  

Good communication helps reduce anxiety, misunderstandings and doubts and leads to 
the satisfaction of both patient and dental professional32, a fact that must have helped to achieve 
the results obtained in the current project, as all dentists involved in the campaign are linked to 
the indigenous oral health team, and are therefore accustomed to working with indigenous 
patients, thus optimizing the dental professional-patient relationship.  

However, treatment by means of complete dentures is not always successful, and 
dissatisfaction can occur in around 10 to 20% of cases30. Silva et al.33 argue that dissatisfaction 
can affect more individuals, even leading some users to abandon their dentures, as occurred 
with one of the participants of the task force. The authors observed this behavior after an 
interview-based evaluation in a group of twelve patients treated with complete dentures, where 
three declared themselves totally satisfied and nine were classified as dissatisfied. Of these 
patients, six considered their dentures to be good, but indicated difficulties in using them, 
especially the lower dentures, while three were totally dissatisfied and unable to use the 
dentures, due to pain and appearance. A small portion of patients will never adapt to mucous 
supported dentures, either due to psychological reasons, the age of the patient, previous 
experiences with dentures or because they do not meet their expectations34. This conclusion 
was corroborated by the fact that two patients did not use the dentures in the final interview, 
while one patient attributed a score of zero for chewing, stability, and comfort of the lower 
dentures. There is also a tendency to experience more difficulty in adapting to the use of lower 
dentures than upper dentures34. 

Most patients reported that eating was a problem caused by lack of teeth. After one year, 
it was observed that high scores were attributed for the ability to chew food, obtaining a median 
value of 10 for all foods and a lower average for coconut flesh (7.2), a very hard food, whose 
firm texture has already been reported as difficult to chew by users of dentures35. It is worth 
mentioning that all the foods are routinely consumed by indigenous peoples and are also used 
and found in the diets of people living in urban centers. This result corroborates previous study 
that found an improvement in the self-assessment of chewing function after the preparation of 
the new dentures36. 

An average of 9.8 for the phonetic criterion was obtained during the final evaluation of 
the upper dentures, diverging from the results obtained by Kawai et al.13, which, when using 
the conventional and simplified technique, reported a significantly lower score in an evaluation 
six months after the dentures were made. This difference can be attributed to the fact that the 
final evaluation of the study by Kawai et al. was carried out six months after the installation of 
the dentures, meaning there was insufficient time for full adaptation, in comparison to the 
evaluation of the present study, which was performed one year after the installation of the 
dentures. It can also be attributed to the lengthy period during which the patients in the 
campaign suffered edentulism, meaning that the treatment had a significant impact on their 
quality of life, no matter how small the improvement.  

Of the total number of patients, 52.6% expected to chew better after the dentures were 
made. With the scores attributed in the final interview for chewing ability (a mean of 9.9±0.5 
for the complete upper dentures and a mean of 8.4±3.2 for the complete lower dentures), in 
addition to the scores for chewing the different types of foods, it can be affirmed that the 
dentures made by the proposed technique have the ability to restore chewing function to the 
same degree as was previously found with the conventional dentures15. 

The significant reduction in the impact of oral health on the quality of life of 
rehabilitated Pataxó patients shows that this approach can achieve results similar to those 
obtained for dentures made through the conventional technique13,37, as the dentures in one day 
achieved, using primary care dentists with no specialized training in prosthetics, results that 
showed an improvement in the quality of life of indigenous patients. 

Although the number of rehabilitated patients was small, the statistical significance, 
high effect size and novel nature of the present study make its findings valid, reliable and of 
fundamental importance for the formulation of public policies that allow the access to 
rehabilitation of isolated populations, living far from large urban centers. 

The Dentures in One Day technique proved feasible, advantageous and effective for the 
rehabilitation of the edentulous indigenous peoples and helped to overcome barriers that hinder 
access to the integrality of indigenous oral health care, allowing improvement in the quality of 
life of rehabilitated patients and resulting in a satisfactory evaluation of the quality of dentures 
and chewing ability one year after fitting. 
