Dental caries and periodontal disease are the most prevalent of the biofilm-dependent 
diseases. With numerous side effects on the use of chlorhexidine, the search for new safe 
therapeutic alternatives for microorganisms involved with these diseases increases every 
day. This study aimed to evaluate the antimicrobial activity and cytotoxicity of extracts 
made from the bark of Schinopsis brasiliensis Engl. against five oral microorganisms and 
analyze their phytochemical and thermal degradation profile. The liquid-liquid partition 
was performed with hexane, chloroform and ethyl acetate. The identification and 
quantification of the chemical marker was done. Antimicrobial activity was evaluated 
based on the minimum inhibitory concentration. The cytotoxicity was analyzed based on 
the hemolysing potential of the samples. The thermal degradation profile was performed 
by two different methods. Gallic acid was identified as the main compound of the samples 
and showed the highest amount in the chloroform fraction. All samples were able to 
inhibit the growth of the microorganisms tested and showed no cytotoxicity. The ethanol 
extract absorbs less heat than the fractions. All samples exhibited exothermic peak 
consistent with degradation of gallic acid. Based on the results, the samples used are 
potential candidates for use in dental formulations for biofilm control. 

The resistance of microorganisms to antibiotics has become a big problem for 
medicine, which in turn seeks to develop new antimicrobial therapies with a high 
resistance to microorganisms (Pereira et al. 2011). Therefore, research on herbal products 
is growing gradually. In dentistry, these studies mainly examine the effect of bacteria and 
fungi on the most prevalent oral diseases such as dental caries and periodontal disease, 
which are considered biofilm-dependent (Lima et al. 2014, Santamaria Junior et al. 2014, 
Sponchiado et al. 2014). 

Dental caries is a widely prevalent disease problem globally (Bagramian et al. 
2009). It is a multifactorial and prevalent chronic infectious resulting from tooth-adherent 
specific bacteria, primarily Streptococcus spp, that metabolize sugars to produce acid, 
which over time, demineralizes tooth structure (Abranches et al. 2018). Streptococcus 
mitis, S. oralis and S. salivarius are associated with an initial bacteria tooth-adhesion, 
which can be used as a bridge to other members of the oral microbiota, such other 
streptococci and periodontopathogens (Butler et al. 2017). Furthemore, there are reports 
of meningitis caused by S. salivarius (Falomir et al. 2014, Suy et al. 2013, Vignier et al. 
2014); whereas S. oralis and S. mitis can increase virulence factors of Candida albicans 
(Palma et al. 2019) and cause bloodstream infections in pediatric patients (Basaranoglu 
et al. 2019). The S. mutans is the microorganism most frequently associated with 
development of caries, being responsible to initiated tooth demineralization acidifying 
microenvironment and tooth surface (Abranches et al. 2018; Baker et al. 2016). 
Moreover, S. mutans is also associated with bacteremia and endocarditis (Nakano et al. 
2005, Nakano et al. 2009). So, it is important to research solutions to minimize these 
infections. 

Therefore, many studies using bioactive compounds and plants have been done 
(Lima et al. 2014, Macedo-Costa et al. 2017, Veloso et al. 2020, Sette-de-Souza et al. 
2014, Silva et al. 2012). In this context, the Schinopsis brasiliensis Engl., is used in folk 
medicine to combat various diseases, including toothache, diarrhea, flu and 
inflammations (Agra et al. 2006, Albuquerque 2006, Albuquerque et al. 2007, 
Albuquerque et al. 2012). The bark of S. brasiliensis presents polyphenols, flavonoids, 
tannins and saponins (Chaves et al. 2015, Fernandes et al. 2015) and a lot of compounds 
with biological activities have been isolated (Cardoso et al. 2005, Cardoso et al. 2015, 
Santos et al. 2017). In this way, Santos et al (2014) detected the presence of flavonoids 
and tannins in the hydroalcoholic extract of the bark of S.brasiliensis, along with the 
absence of toxicity. These phenolic compounds in the bark of this plant are degraded in 
temperatures above 125 °C (Fernandes et al. 2013).  

The objective of this study was to evaluate the antimicrobial activity against oral 
bacteria and the cytotoxicity of extract and fractions produced from the bark of S. 
brasiliensis Engl. and analyze its phytochemical and thermal degradation profile. 

The bark of Schinopsis brasiliensis Engl. was collected from the semi-arid region 
in the State of Paraíba, Brazil. A voucher specimen was prepared and identified in the 
herbarium of Professor Jayme Coelho de Morais, at the Federal University of Paraíba and 
given the number EAN-14049. 

The plant material was dried at 40 ± 1 °C. The ethanolic extract (EE) was obtained 
by percolating bark powder, using ethanol (Merck - Darmstadt, Hessen, Germany) as 
solvent for five days in three cycles at 30 ºC, and concentrated in a vacuum rotary 
evaporator (40 °C, 55 rpm) until complete solvent removal was achieved. 

The EE was subjected to liquid-liquid partition. Then the EE was solubilized in a 
solvent system of ethanol:water (80:20, v/v) in a 1:1 (v/v). EE solution was put in a 
separatory funnel and the solvents [hexane - Hex, chloroform – Chlo, and ethyl acetate – 
EtAc - (Merck - Darmstadt, Hessen, Germany)] were sequentially added in a 1:1 (v/v) 
and stirred. The funnel was allowed to stand for about 10 minutes so that there was phase 
separation. The process was repeated three times for each solvent to reach the appropriate 
amount of each fraction. Subsequently, each fraction was concentrated in a vacuum rotary 
evaporator (40 °C, 55 rpm) until complete solvent removal was achieved. 

For this stage the standard strains used were the American Type Culture Collection 
(ATCC) Streptococcus mutans (25175), Streptococcus oralis (10557), Streptococcus 
mitis (903) and Streptococcus salivarius (7073), which were provided by the Oswaldo 
Cruz Foundation (FIOCRUZ-RJ). 

The determination of minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) was performed as 
recommended by the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI 2009). The 
inoculum was standardized in tubes containing 5 mL of 0.9% sterile saline solution. The 
microbial suspension was adjusted using a spectrophotometer (Shimadzu UV-mini 1240 
– São Paulo, Brazil) at a wavelength of 625 nm, which is the equivalent to 106 Colony 
Forming Units per mL (CFU/mL). For this step, the extract and the fractions were 
solubilized in 10% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO - Merck - Darmstadt, Hessen, Germany). 
One hundred microliters of each fraction or extract at a concentration of 500 mg/mL was 
serially diluted in brain heart infusion broth (BHI – Difco - Detroit, MI, USA) in a 96-
well plate (TPP - Trasadingen, Switzerland) along with the positive control (0.12% 
Chlorhexidine - Sigma-Aldrich - St. Louis, MO, USA). Ten microliters of inoculation 
with the microorganism was added to the wells. The plates were incubated at 37 ± 0.5 °C 
for 24 hours. The bacterial growth was indicated by the addition of 20 µL of aqueous 
resazurin (Sigma-Aldrich - St. Louis, MO, USA) at 0.01% with subsequent incubation at 
37 ± 0.5 °C for two hours. Viable bacteria reduce the dye, changing its color to blue and 
the MIC was defined as the lowest concentration of test substance that inhibited the 
change of color of resazurin. 

The preparation of the red blood cells for the cytotoxicity assay followed the 
method described by Cruz-Silva et al. (2000). Whole blood from a voluntary individual 
working in our laboratory, type O+, was collected and placed in a tube containing heparin. 
The plasma was removed after centrifugation at 2500 rpm for 5 minutes. Subsequently, 
the suspension of erythrocytes was washed three times with 1% saline solution. The 
erythrocytes were re-suspended in the same solution and the volume was adjusted to 5%. 
Then 1.5 mL of 5% erythrocyte suspension was added together with 1.5 mL of test 
solution at concentrations of 1.0 mg/mL, 2.5 mg/mL and 5.0 mg/mL in tubes, remaining 
for 1 hour at room temperature for the hemolysis to occur. After this period, each tube 
was centrifuged at 2500 rpm for 10 minutes, and the supernatant removed for reading in 
a spectrophotometer (Shimadzu UV-mini - 1240) at a wavelength of 540 nm (Cruz-Silva 
et al. 2001). The positive control used was Turk's solution 1% negative and 1% saline 
solution. The analysis was performed in triplicate. The calculation of the potential 
hemolyzing substances followed the following equation: 
Hp = Ae −Ab
At
𝑥 100 
Where: 
Hp = Hemolyzing potential (in percentage) 
Ae = Absorbance of test sample 
Ab = Absorbance of the Negative Control 
At = Absorbance of the Positive Control 

From the data generated from the linearity curve of each sample, it was possible to 
determine the appropriate concentration of each extract that would cause hemolysis of 
red blood cells by 50% (IC50). These data were used to determine the selectivity index 
(SI) of each extract for the bacteria tested, and enabled the calculation according to the 
methodology proposed by Protopopova et al. (2005) using the equation: 
SI = IC50
MIC 
, where: 
SI = Selectivity Index 
IC50 = concentration of each extract that would cause hemolysis of red blood cells by 50% 
MIC = Minimum Inhibitory Concentration against the test microorganism 

For the determination of total flavonoid content, the method proposed by Meda et 
al. (2005) was followed. Aluminum chloride (AlCl3) was added to the extract and diluted 
in 2% methanol. After waiting 10 minutes, the sample was taken to a spectrophotometer 
(Shimadzu UV mini - 1240) at an absorbance of 415 nm. The calibration curve was 
obtained using solutions of quercetin. The concentration of flavonoids was expressed in 
milligrams equivalent of quercetin. 

The quantification of total tannins was completed by the methodology proposed 
by Makkar & Becker (1993). A vanillin solution of 4% (w/v) in methanol was added to 
the extract. Then 1.5 mL of concentrated HCl (37%) was added. The absorbance was read 
at 500 nm in a spectrophotometer (Shimadzu UV mini - 1240). The result was determined 
by interpolating the absorbance of the samples against a calibration curve constructed 
from standards of catechin and expressed as mg catechin equivalents per g extract. 

Finally, to determine the content of total polyphenols, the method described by 
Chandra & Mejia (2004) was used, adding Folin-Ciocalteu 1N to the aqueous extract. 
After 2 minutes, the aqueous solution of 20% sodium carbonate (Na2CO3) was added, 
remaining there for 10 minutes. Soon, the absorbance at 757 nm in a spectrophotometer 
(Shimadzu UV mini - 1240) was performed. The calibration curve was obtained from 
gallic acid solutions. The concentration of polyphenols was measured in equivalent 
milligrams of gallic acid.  

All analyzes were performed in triplicate. 

Each sample was analyzed by High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) 
for quantification of gallic acid. The analysis followed the method described by Schieber 
et al. (2001). The chromatographic test was conducted on Shimatzu (Shimadzu 
Corporation, Kyoto, Japan) equipment with a diode array detector (model SPD-M10A) 
in a C-18 column (Phenomenex Gemine - 4.6 mm x 250 mm x i.d. 3 µm) at a flow rate 
of 1.0 mL/min. The analysis was conducted using a wavelength of 272 nm. The column 
was operated at a temperature of 30 °C. The mobile phase used was 1% formic acid: 
methanol - 90:10 (v/v). The sample injection volume was 10 µL.  

The thermogravimetric curve (TG) and differential thermal analysis (DTA) were 
performed using a DTG-60 (Shimadzu Corporation, Kyoto, Japan). Samples were heated 
at a heating rate of 10 °C/min from 25 °C to 900 °C in a nitrogen atmosphere in an alumina 
crucible containing approximately 7.0 mg of sample (Sette-de-Souza et al., 2018). 

In table I it is possible to see that all tested samples showed a minimum 
concentration capable of inhibiting the growth of microorganisms and the absence of 
cytotoxicity was also present in all samples. 

Table II shows the results of quantitative phytochemical characterization obtained 
with the extract and fractions of S. brasiliensis Engl. It is possible observe no tannins in 
all fractions, while there are tannins in Ethanolic Extract. 

The quantitative determination of phytochemical extract and fractions of S. 
brasiliensis Engl. detected the presence of large quantities of polyphenols. Based on this 
result gallic acid was chosen as a marker and we proceeded to quantify the samples. In 
all samples analyzed a predominant presence of gallic acid is observed, which has a close 
retention time of 3.0 minutes (Figure 1). 

According to the standard curve (y = 61635x - 11502; with R² 0.9957), the 
chloroform fraction had the greatest amount of gallic acid (52.02 mg/g), followed by ethyl 
acetate fraction (50 39 mg/g) and the ethanol extract (15.56 mg/g). The sample which had 
the lowest amount of gallic acid was the hexane fraction (6.51 mg/g). 

The curves of TG and DTA of the ethanol extract, fractions and gallic acid can be 
viewed in Figure 2 and 3. The peaks of each event are shown in Table III. 

All extracts tested had higher MIC values on the bacteria tested than the positive 
control (0.12% chlorhexidine). According to Castro et al. (2009), this can be explained 
by the fact that the natural products contain biological compounds diluted in the sample 
while chlorhexidine is a synthetic drug. However, it is important to note that 
chlorhexidine has adverse effects that limit its period of use. In a systematic review, Haas 
et al. (2014), showed that chlorhexidine showed good results in reducing biofilm and 
gingivitis, however, it must be used for short treatments due to its adverse effects, and the 
natural agent based products are more suitable for everyday use. Therefore, the hexane 
fraction of the EE of S. brasiliensis Engl is a potential agent that could be incorporated 
into preventive and therapeutic products in dentistry, due to its activity against 
Streptococcus mitis and S. oralis, which are responsible for the initial colonization of the 
tooth surface, and against S. mutans, which is primarily responsible for the initiation / 
progression of dental caries and other diseases. Moreover, Duarte et al. (2006) have 
reported the activity of phenolic compounds against S. mutans biofilm and therefore, a 
further justification for the use of the extract in this area. 

The samples showed no cytotoxicity at the concentration tested, which was also 
observed by Santos et al. (2014). According Bézivin et al. (2003), SI indicates how many 
more times the test product is effective against certain target cells than human cells. For 
the compound to be considered an ideal prototype of a new drug, it is expected that the 
presented SI is greater than or equal to 10 (Protopopova et al. 2005). According to Reimão 
et al. (2010), the increase in numerical value of the SI compound indicates that it is more 
toxic to microorganisms and less toxic to human cells. Therefore, as the IS of all samples 
tested samples were higher than that stated by the authors, the findings of this research 
are important in the search for the development of natural products, given that the low 
toxicity is an interesting feature along with the satisfactory antimicrobial activity 
displayed. 

Other studies with S. brasiliensis Engl. showed that there is a separation of 
phyotocompounds when the polarity is increased (Santos et al. 2014). No fraction studied 
presented tannins equivalent to catechin, but the EE showed 15.83 mg/g of tannins. This 
may be related to the polarity of each solvent used, which possibly resulted in the lack of 
extraction of compounds with a polarity similar to catechin. This does not mean that the 
samples produced with bark of S. brasiliensis Engl. do not contain tannins. However, the 
amount of flavonoid found in each fraction was higher than that found in the EE, this is 
probably because the fractions of the compounds are more concentrated than in the EE 
and therefore tend to be higher. In their study, Santos et al. (2014) observed qualitatively 
the presence of auronas, catechins, chalcones, flavonones, saponins and tannins in the 
ethyl acetate fraction, while hexane fraction and chloroform only steroids and triterpenes 
were identified, respectively. Differently of our study, these authors did not quantify the 
compounds, they only observed the full presence or absence, without using a standard 
compound, which may have generated these different results from the fraction of ethyl 
acetate. In addition, when working with natural products and compounds, one must take 
into account factors that influence the production of secondary metabolites by plant, such 
as the period in which the plant was collected, rainfall, seasonality, potential natural 
predators, etc (Gouvea et al. 2012, Li et al. 2014, Moore et al. 2014). Thus, it is possible 
to explain these differences by the fact that those authors collected parts of Schinopsis 
brasiliensis in another region and another period compared to our collection. 

It was observed in the DTA curve that the EE absorbs less heat than the fractions. 
All samples show an endothermic peak in the range of 85.0 to 130.0 °C, consistent with 
the humidity loss, water and/or volatile solvent used in each system. The TG curve of the 
EE has three thermal decomposition events. The first, which is set in the range of 30.00 
to 86.96 °C is related to loss of water and solvent from the extract, as mass loss was 
approximately 4.55% of the total sample. The second event (87.01 to 205.75 °C) may be 
associated with the degradation of phytochemical compounds found in the sample, such 
as tannins and flavonoids, with an equivalent mass loss at 21.54% (1.33 mg). The third 
event (from 205.85 °C) could be related to degradation of gallic acid present in the 
sample, considering that this temperature coincides with the second step where the 
degradation of phenol lost reaches 51.33% of total sample mass (3.17 mg). The fraction 
chloroform curve is very similar to the EE and is even the sample with the closest profile 
to the EE, in respect to both thermal decomposition peaks and mass percentage lost in 
each step. 

The TG curve of ethyl acetate fraction also shows three different stages of thermal 
decomposition. The first is between 29.35 to 225.23 °C, similar to that found in EE. 
However, besides the loss of moisture and residual solvent fraction, there is probably 
some loss of another compound, as this loss was equivalent to 16.97% of the total 
(1,13mg). The second event, which happened between 225.30 and 327.87 °C, may be 
related to the degradation of flavonoids found in the sample, as well as the degradation 
of gallic acid present, equivalent to 26.42% of mass loss (1.76 mg), since the peak gallic 
acid degradation occurs at about 263 ºC in an exothermic event. Finally, the degradation 
starts at 328.00 ºC and possibly the degradation of carbonaceous residues comes at the 
penultimate stage, which does not reach complete degradation (46.23% mass loss).   

The TG curve of the hexane fraction is the only one that shows two degradation 
phenomena. The first occurs between 29.78 to 201.52 °C, which can be related to water 
loss and residual solvent fraction, equivalent to 9.72% of its total mass. The second from 
201.53 to 479.82 °C, has a mass loss of 81.97%, corresponding to 5.80 mg of the fraction, 
practically degrading almost all the present compounds. 

The endothermic peaks of the events observed in the DTA coincide with the 
degradation temperature ranges found in the sample TG curves. No events found were 
exothermic. The more polar fractions have discrete endothermic peaks when compared 
to the peaks of the EE and the fraction of ethyl acetate. Therefore, it is possible to deduce 
that both the hexane fraction as well as the chloroform fraction require less heat to begin 
their degradation. 

Due to the satisfactory antimicrobial activity found against bacteria involved in the 
initial colonization of the tooth surface and at the start of caries, along with the low 
cytotoxicity and high selectivity, all samples of the EE of the bark from Schinopsis 
brasiliensis Engl, are potential ingredients that could be used in dental formulations to 
control oral biofilm. 

The authors gratefully acknowledge the State University of Paraíba and the 
PROCAD/MCTI/CNPq/MEC/Capes for financial support. The authors especially 
thank Professor Ivan Coelho Dantas (in memoriam) for indicating the plant studied 
in this work. 
