Purpose: The aim of the present study was to investigate the role of occlusion time in dynamic 
changes of autonomic activation during reactive hyperemia. 

Methods: Healthy subjects (n = 30) in the age range of 18–25 years participated in this study. 
Vascular reactivity was assessed by measuring the dynamic changes in finger pulse volume 
amplitude (PVA) and  pulse transit time relative to the RR intervals in the test (occluded arm) 
and control arm (contralateral non-occluded arm) during 1, 3 and 5 minute of occlusion using 
two separate Photoplethysmographic sensors. Heart Rate Variability was computed from a 
simultaneously acquired ECG signal to monitor the dynamic changes in cardiac autonomic 
nervous activity. Time-varying analysis of all signals were shown every 1 second in average 
response graphs. 

Results: Time-varying analysis of vascular and autonomic response during reactive hyperemia 
demonstrated the presence of a characteristic response pattern with an increase in the 
Sympathetic index and a decrease in Parasympathetic index at 8 to 10 seconds, an increase 
in heart rate at 20 seconds and a progressive increase in PVA during the first 60 seconds after 
occlusion regardless of the time spent in the procedure. Moreover, a decrease in pulse transits 
time relative to RR intervals,  followed by an increase regardless of the occlusion time was 
evidenced.   

Conclusions: Early cardiovascular sympathetic activation is independent of occlusion time 
during reactive hyperemia, which suggests this is a vascular autonomic reflex response 
involved in the generation of the physiological phenomenon of reactive hyperemia. 

Reactive 
hyperemia 
(RH) 
is 
a 
well-stablished 
technique 
characterized 
by 
a 
rapid and exaggerated reperfusion to an organ or tissue when the circulation is restored after 
a period of complete circulatory arrest. Previous works have found a direct relationship 
between time of occlusion and the magnitude of the hyperemic response (1–3). Peripheral vaso-
regulation during RH is mediated, in part, by the vascular endothelium (4). Endothelial 
dysfunction can predict cardiovascular events and it is considered a key alteration in the 
development of atherogenesis and in the pathophysiology of coronary atherosclerosis. One of 
its functional consequences is the deterioration in the release of the relaxing factor derived 
from the endothelium (nitric oxide), which has important antiatherogenic properties (5,6).   

In order to evaluate endothelial function, techniques such as angiography have been 
employed. Invasiveness and need of expert operators (7) are among the main difficulties of 
these approaches. On the other hand, non-invasive techniques have also been used to 
measure endothelial function, which vasodilation mediated by the flow of the arteries of the 
arm (FMD) as the most widespread. This technique measures the ability of the arteries to 
respond to the release of nitric oxide (NO) during reactive hyperemia test, but this method is 
difficult to use, needs an expert operator and does not allow detecting changes at the level of 
the microvasculature (3,8,9). Measuring endothelial function with peripheral arterial tonometry 
has gained greater attention and an appropriate device has been developed to measure 
pulsatile arterial volumetric changes independent of the observer with photoplethysmography 
(PPG) through the finger pulse volume amplitude (PVA) (3,8,10).  

NO, derived from the vascular endothelium, is one of the major factors contributing to 
vasodilatation caused by reactive hyperemia. However, several studies have shown an 
association between autonomic nervous system activity and RH (11–14). The forearm clamping 
procedure to induce reactive hyperemia possibly affects autonomic nervous system activity. 
The circulatory arrest during the phase of occlusion may by itself, inherently lead to increase 
the sympathetic activity. Such activation participates in the regulation of vascular tone (11,15). 
Moreover, this sympathetic activation possibly plays an important role in mediating the inter-
subject variability of vascular responses (15) and in shear rate changes (16) during reactive 
hyperemia.  

Previous authors have shown that dynamic exercise results in a release of metabolic 
byproducts which increase the sympathetic neural activity to the systemic vasculature through 
muscle metaboreflex. The muscle metaboreflex is a very powerful blood pressure-raising 
reflex. Group III and IV muscle afferents of this reflex are stimulated by metabolites (e.g. 
protons, lactate, potassium, and diprotonated phosphate), which accumulate within 
underperfused active skeletal muscle. Muscle metaboreflex activation results in a reflex 
increase in sympathetic outflow. During submaximal dynamic exercise, metaboreflex activation 
markedly increases heart rate (17).  

Bade et al.  have shown that a similar response, through chemosensitive nerve fibers activated 
by metabolites freed by the ischemic tissue which tend to accumulate due to circulatory arrest 
in forearm, may be associated with RH and can lead to sympathetic activation. Moreover, it 
has been indicated that opposing influences of endothelium-dependent vasodilation and 
sympathetically mediated vasoconstriction possibly determine the resultant PVA response in 
the test arm during RH (15). However, the sympathetic activation during reactive hyperemia 
remains incompletely understood. The present study investigated the role of the occlusion time 
in dynamic changes of autonomic activation during reactive hyperemia. We hypothesized that 
the reflex nature of the sympathetic activation during reactive hyperemia and the temporary 
sequence of this phenomenon could be evidenced applying time-frequency methods. 

Thirty healthy volunteers in the age range of 18–25 years (Mean=20.3 ± 1.7) participated in 
the present study. None of the subjects had any history of cardiovascular, respiratory, 
endocrine, or neural diseases, and were normotensive (resting blood pressure: systolic 
101±11.2 mm Hg / diastolic 63.6 ± 8.5 mm Hg), non-obese (body mass index= 21.9 ± 2.6 
kg/m2), non-smokers, and free from intake of any medications. Subjects were asked to avoid 
ingest of food for 2 hours and abstain from intake of tea, coffee, alcohol and strenuous physical 
activity for 24 hours before the tests. 

The experimental protocol was approved by the Research and Ethics Committee for research 
in human subjects of Universidad de Ciencias Médicas de Santiago de Cuba. Written informed 
consent was obtained from all the subjects before enrollment in the study. 

All recordings were done in controlled ambient temperature (24-27 °C) and luminance (dim 
light). Baseline blood pressure was measured after 15 min of supine rest. The 
sphygmomanometer cuff was kept fastened to the arm for subsequent use when arterial 
occlusion had to be produced. ECG signal was recorded in the bipolar limb lead II mode using 
disposable Ag – AgCl electrodes. The PPG waveform was recorded employing an infrared 
emitter (LED, 850 nm) and a photosensor (photodiode), placed on the middle finger of both 
upper limbs. The ECG and PPG signal of the AngioECG equipment (18) with a bandpass filter 
(0.5-30 Hz) was digitized at a sampling rate of 1 kHz.   
State of rest: at the beginning of the session, the patients rested in bed under the 
aforementioned environmental conditions until a better adaptation to the conditions of the room 
was achieved and then the blood pressure was measured. A control electrocardiogram was 
recorded in order to detect any alteration of the heart rhythm and then the ECG and PPG were 
simultaneously measured for 5 minutes. 
Reactive hyperemia test: the sphygmomanometer placed on the right arm was inflated 50 
mmHg above the baseline systolic blood pressure, during 1, 3 and 5 minutes of occlusion with 
ECG and PPG recording. 

Time-varying analysis of heart rate variability (HRV) at rest and during reactive hyperemia test 
(1, 3 and 5 minute of occlusion) were performed using the Kubios HRV Premium Professional 
program (Kubios Ltd, Finland), which allowed the pre-processing of the RR interval series and 
the calculation of time-frequency indicators. In the pre-processing of the RR interval series an 
Automatic correction filter was used to detect ectopic beats. The discrimination of the R peaks 
of the ECG signal and the calculation of the RR intervals were performed using a robust 
detection method (19). The replacement of the ectopic intervals was performed employing 
polytomic cubic interpolation once the low frequency baseline drift was removed smooth. The 
time- frequency values of the heart rate, sympathetic index (SNS index) and parasympathetic 
index (PNS index) interpolated at 1 Hz were exported to archives * .mat for processing in 
Octave software. 

For the construction of the time-varying hyperemia curve, the procedure recommended by the 
experts was employed (20). Firstly, the average pulse volume amplitude of a record at rest in 
the upper right limb was obtained. Pulse volume amplitude of a post-occlusive record of the 
assessed limb was obtained, as well as the hyperemic curve of the post-occlusive and rest 
record ratio. Pulse volume amplitude (onset to peak) for the construction of the hyperemic 
response curve was measured. For determining the clinical interest points of the pulse wave 
the procedure recommended by Carrazana et al. was employed (21). Time-varying analysis of 
the temporal sequence of pulse volume amplitudes were interpolated at 1 Hz and exported to 
*.mat files for better statistical management in Octave software.    

Pulse Transit Time (PTT) is defined as the time between the R-peak of the ECG and any critical 
point of the pulse wave in the PPG signal. The systolic peaks were chosen as the critical points 
in this study. Relative PTT is defined as the ratio of PTT and the correspondent RR interval 
assuming that the PTT is within this RR interval. Time-varying analysis of temporal sequence 
of Relative Pulse Transit Time were interpolated at 1 Hz and exported to * .mat files for better 
statistical management in Octave software.  

Using 
the 
Octave 
software 
2019 
version 
5.1.0 
(https://www.gnu.org/software/octave/download.html), the graphs of average values in time-
frequency were constructed, from the matrices (* .mat) of the values obtained from the time-
varying analysis of heart rate variability and pulse volume amplitude interpolated at 1 Hz. 

According to the dynamic changes in time during reactive hyperemia as show in Fig. 1, an 
increase in heart rate was observed 20 seconds after cuff deflate independently of the occlusion 
time. The response becomes more evident after three and five minutes of occlusion. 

Fig. 2 shows the temporal evolution of the sympathetic component of the cardiac autonomic 
regulation during the test of reactive hyperemia with different occlusion times. This maneuver 
produces an increase in the activity of the sympathetic nervous system (SNS), which reaches 
its maximum peak around eight seconds after cuff deflate independently of the occlusion time.   

Fig. 3 shows the temporal evolution of the parasympathetic component of the cardiac 
autonomic regulation during the test of reactive hyperemia at different times of occlusion, where 
it is evidenced how there is a decrease in parasympathetic nervous system (PNS) activity 
seconds after cuff deflate regardless of the occlusion time used.  

Fig. 4 shows the temporal evolution of the pulse transit time relative to PP intervals (PTT/PP) 
in contralateral arm during the test of reactive hyperemia at different times of occlusion, where 
it is evidenced how there is a decrease in PTT/PP and then an increase regardless of the 
occlusion time used.   

Fig. 5 shows how there is a direct relationship between the time of occlusion and the magnitude 
of the hyperemic response, causing the greater the time of occlusion there is a greater in 
magnitude and the time of the vascular response measured with the PVA after cuff deflate.  

At rest the predominance of the PNS activity guarantees that the HR is the possible minim to 
satisfy the metabolic requests of the organism. Therefore, in the first moments of the occlusion 
there is a predominance of the parasympathetic activity, which begins to diminish at the same 
time that an increment of the SNS tone happens, probably owed to metaboreflex response. 
This response is more evident right after the three and five minutes of occlusion, which 
suggests that one minute of occlusion is not enough to produce a specific activation from the 
sympathetic nervous system. Probably, in this period of time the concentration of different 
metabolite is not enough for triggering a support metaboreflex response(11).  

In the present investigation, a marked increase has been observed in SNS activity immediately 
when the cuff was released, that reaches it maximum peak around the 8 s after the cuff is 
released. These findings are consistent with the results of Bade et al. (2019)(15) in which, there 
was an increase in the total and LF power of HRV during RH when compared to baseline. 
Moreover, with five minutes of occlusion the sympathetic response was bigger, probably for the 
higher concentration of freed metabolites for the ischemic tissues like adenosine. Boushel 
(2010)(22) concluded that adenosine does not activate the muscle metaboreflex, but it increases 
the sympathetic nerve activity with a latency corresponding to the circulatory time for activation 
of either central chemoreceptors. 

When analyzing the evolution of the parasympathetic component it was observed a decrease 
of the activity of the PNS after the cuff is deflated. This effect, is reciprocated with an increment 
of the SNS activity, which agrees with the phenomenon of reciprocal inhibition between both 
systems (23).  Next, the parasympathetic nervous system activity was increased compensating 
the central mechanism and eliminating the vasoconstrictor effect of the sympathetic component 
of the cardiovascular autonomic regulation. This, reduces the negative influence on the 
vascular endothelium of the SNS and endothelium increases it production and liberation of NO 
due to the shear stress. Hijmering et al. (2002)(12) found that the sympathetic stimulation could 
impair flow-mediated endothelial-dependent dilatation through a mechanisms caused by 
adrenergic receptors of type α and concluded that released transmitters from nerve endings 
are important modulators of endothelial function and myogenic response.  Moreover, existed a 
direct relation between the time of occlusion and the magnitude of the hyperemic response. 
However, for longer time of occlusion the elevation latency of the bloodstream, is bigger and 
more prolonged in the time. This is due to the bigger period of vasoconstriction generated by 
the SNS activity s which slows down the increment of the bloodstream.  

A significant reduction in the PVA in the control arm during RH has been observed, which is 
suggestive of sympathetically mediated vasoconstriction. However, appearance of 
vasoconstriction in the control arm as early as in the first minute of occlusion contradicts the 
hypothesis based on muscle metaboreflex and leaves the questions on the exact cause and 
origin of sympathetically mediated vasoconstriction (15). In the present study, the effects of ANS 
activation are evidenced in the contralateral arm during the test of reactive hyperemia at 
different times of occlusion. It generates an initial vasoconstriction, evidenced by a decrease in 
PTT/PP followed by a vasodilation with an increase in PTT/PP at times regardless of the 
occlusion time used. In other study the Pulse Transit Time response reflects the myogenic 
components in the early part of RH (24). All these changes are produced as a reflected activity 
to occlusion during reactive hyperemia test, which reinforces the hypothesis of the 
metaboreflex.   

The analysis of the autonomic nervous system dynamics measured with time frequency 
methods of the HRV allows determining the temporary association of the different physiological 
events implicated during reactive hyperemia. It can suggest that the SNS activity takes part in 
the period of myogenic contraction that precedes the phase of vasodilatation. In addition, this 
is in close relation with the shear stress, increasing the power of the force of shearing of the 
blood on the vascular endothelium, twisting the endothelial cells and provoking the release of 
NO right after of the cuff occlusion ends. NO, along to different vasodilator metabolites liberated 
by the ischemic tissues it is responsible for the increment of the bloodstream that characterizes 
the reactive hyperemia.   

Early cardiovascular sympathetic activation is independent of occlusion time during reactive 
hyperemia, suggesting this is a vascular autonomic reflex response that intervenes in the 
generation of the physiological phenomenon of reactive hyperemia. 
