As the global COVID-19 pandemic advances, it increasingly impacts the vulnerable 
populations who already bear a heavy burden of neglected tropical diseases. Chagas disease 
(CD), a neglected parasitic infection, is of particular concern because of its potential to cause 
cardiac, gastrointestinal, and other complications which could increase susceptibility to 
COVID-19. The over one million people worldwide with chronic Chagas cardiomyopathy 
require special consideration because of COVID-19’s potential impact on the heart, yet the 
pandemic also affects treatment provision to people with acute or chronic indeterminate CD. 
In this document, a follow-up to the WHF-IASC Roadmap on CD, we assess the implications 
of coinfection with SARS-CoV-2 and Trypanosoma cruzi, the etiological agent of CD. Based 
on the limited evidence available, we provide preliminary guidance for testing, treatment, and 
management of patients affected by both diseases, while highlighting emerging healthcare 
access challenges and future research needs.  

In 2020, the SARS CoV-2 virus, which causes, COVID-19, took the world by storm. The 
biological and social implications of this global pandemic may not be fully understood for 
years. However, what is increasingly clear is that like other diseases, COVID-19 
disproportionately affects those living at the social margins, while also being particularly 
severe in older individuals and those with certain underlying health conditions. These are both 
key considerations as COVID-19 increasingly intersects with the world’s neglected diseases, 
including Chagas disease (CD), a multi-systemic disorder caused by Trypanosoma cruzi (T. 
cruzi) that can affect the cardiovascular, digestive and central nervous systems (1). CD is 
endemic in much of Latin America, which is increasingly bearing the brunt of the pandemic. 
The first reported Latin American case was on February 26th, 2020 in Brazil; by June 30th, there 
were nearly 2.5 million confirmed infections and over 110,000 deaths in the region (2), with 
numbers still increasingly rapidly at the time of writing this paper. Several aspects of CD are 
concerning in light of what we know about COVID-19: many people living with CD are 
socioeconomically vulnerable, and with limited access to healthcare; the vast majority are 
undiagnosed; most are aging, and over a million have already progressed to a cardiac form of 
the disease (3, 4). In this paper we focus on the potential interactions between CD and COVID-
19 in coinfected individuals, which become increasingly important as the pandemic spreads 
rapidly through the Latin American countries where CD is endemic.  

In early 2020 the Inter-American Society of Cardiology and World Heart Federation published 
a roadmap that provides a comprehensive overview of CD, with steps for improving healthcare 
access (5) In April, the Drugs for Neglected Diseases initiative’s Chagas Research Platform 
reconvened some members of the roadmap writing group and other experts to write a follow-
up paper exploring how COVID-19 might impact people living with CD, and to provide 
preliminary guidance based on the limited amount of evidence available on the topic. The group 
consisted of several CD experts, some of whom have been on the front lines during the current 
crisis treating patients with COVID-19 or performing research on new treatments. The 
following document summarizes the consensus opinion of these experts on SARS CoV-2/T. 
cruzi coinfection.  

CD is mainly transmitted through various species of hematophagous insects, although it can 
also be transmitted transplacentally, through infected blood transfusions or organ donations, 
laboratory accidents, needle sharing among intravenous drug users (IVDU), and orally through 
food and drink contaminated with triatomines, their feces, or secretions from some host 
reservoir species. After infection and an incubation period that ranges from 15 to 40 days, the 
acute phase of the disease generally lasts for one to two months and is followed by an 
indeterminate phase, when no clinical manifestations are observed. After decades of this silent 
state, roughly one-third of patients may develop a chronic form of the disease characterized by 
organ damage, mainly cardiovascular and gastrointestinal. The most serious sequelae of CD 
are stroke, sudden death from brady- or tachyarrhythmias, and congestive heart failure (1, 6). 

COVID-19 interacts with the cardiovascular system on multiple levels. SARS-CoV-2 binds to 
the human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor mainly expressed in the lungs, 
heart, and vascular endothelium.  Although analysis of the precise consequences is in its 
infancy, this may trigger an inflammatory response that in turn may lead to increasing 
myocardial injury and dysfunction (7, 8). There is uncertainty whether COVID-19 disease, as 
an altered immune state, can act as a potential trigger for CD progression, also influenced by 
both certain parasitic factors (type of strains, load of parasites) as well as host factors (genetic 
susceptibility and immune state, specifically IFN-Ɣ axis). 

While parasitemia is low-level and evanescent in chronic CD, pharmacologic and disease-
induced immunosuppression cause a risk for reactivation of parasitemia (9, 10), therefore there 
is a potential concern that COVID-19 disease could trigger reactivation of CD, either due to an 
acquired hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis-like disease (cytokine storm), the virus itself, 
or even the use of some COVID-19 treatments such as steroids, hydroxychloroquine (5) and 
other immune-modulating drugs (i.e. tocilizumab or other interleukin inhibitors), as 
interleukins are related to the progression of CD (11, 12). This may be influenced by certain 
parasitic factors (parasite load and/or T. cruzi strain) as well as host factors (genetic 
susceptibility and immune state, specifically IFN-Ɣ axis).   

The pathogenesis of Chronic Chagas cardiomyopathy (CCC) involves a complex interaction 
of different processes, related to tissue damage due to parasite persistence, inflammation, 
autoimmunity, fibrosis, dysautonomia, and microvascular changes (13). Chronic, persistent 
infection of the myocardium elicits an inflammatory response which, although necessary for 
the control of parasite proliferation, results in tissue damage leading to myocardial fibrosis and 
cardiac remodeling (14). The pro-inflammatory response includes, but is not limited to, 
secretion of Th1 cytokines and chemokines, eicosanoids, and endothelin-1 (14).  

Similar to T. cruzi infection, direct cytotoxicity of cardiac tissue also is possible with SARS-
CoV-2, which binds to the ACE2 receptor to enter type 2 pneumocytes, macrophages, 
perivascular pericytes, and cardiomyocytes. This may lead to myocardial dysfunction and 
damage, endothelial dysfunction, microvascular dysfunction, plaque instability, and 
myocardial infarction (MI) (15). Initial immune and inflammatory responses induce a severe 
cytokine storm (16), including cytokines and chemokines frequently related to the 
inflammatory response implicated in the pathogenesis of CCC, such as interleukin (IL)-6, TNF-
alpha and CXCL10 (17, 18). Indeed, COVID-19-related myocarditis cases have been reported 
and are thought to be a combination of direct viral injury and cardiac damage due to the host’s 
immune response (19).  

Further depression of the ventricular function by COVID-19 could be caused by additional 
mechanisms, such as myocardial infarction and microvascular dysfunction, also found in T. 
cruzi infection (15).  Furthermore, arrhythmia is recognized as one of the possible clinical 
manifestations of COVID-19 patients, and could plausibly precipitate arrhythmias in patients 
with an arrhythmogenic substrate, such as CCC (19).  

Finally, COVID-19 may predispose patients to thrombotic disease, both in the venous and 
arterial circulations, due to excessive inflammation, platelet activation, endothelial 
dysfunction, and stasis (20). There are reports of upregulated procoagulative activity in plasma 
of chronic CD patients (21) and thromboembolic manifestations are also more frequent in CCC 
patients (22), although it is not clear if this interaction has clinical relevance.  

While patients living with the indeterminate form of CD are usually outpatients without 
manifest symptoms, these patients still require ongoing surveillance and care which has 
become increasingly difficult due to the pandemic.  For instance, patients with chronic 
indeterminate CD need yearly follow up for cardiac tests, as annually 2-5% progress to chronic 
symptomatic disease, and ultimately 30-40% develop cardiac or gastrointestinal complications 
(1). They may also benefit from antiparasitic treatment, which in the case of women of 
childbearing age, can interrupt congenital transmission (23, 24). However, the 2-month course 
of treatment requires ongoing monitoring and laboratory testing due to the potential for side 
effects. This necessary care for patients with chronic indeterminate CD is likely to be hampered 
by the pandemic, both because of the potential risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection from attending 
healthcare facilities for routine appointments, (or the need to use public transportation to travel 
to and from appointments), and postponements or delays in routine care as healthcare personnel 
and resources are focused on COVID-19 cases. 

Furthermore, if assessed with more sensitive technology, including echocardiography, Holter, 
and magnetic resonance with late gadolinium enhancement, a small number of indeterminate-
phase patients may be reclassified as having CCC due to the presence of areas of fibrosis with 
wall motion abnormalities (25-30). Therefore, an unknown proportion of individuals classified 
as indeterminate form patients may indeed develop arrhythmias or other cardiovascular 
complications if challenged with a cytokine storm such as that triggered by COVID-19. 

Atypical chest pain, abdominal pain, and nausea are nonspecific symptoms related to upper 
digestive CD involvement, and both have been related to COVID-19 pulmonary and 
extrapulmonary clinical presentation (31, 32). However, constipation as the main symptom of 
lower digestive tract involvement due to T. cruzi infection is the opposite to diarrhea, the main 
gastrointestinal (GI) symptom observed in extrapulmonary forms of COVID-19. The presence 
of GI symptoms, widely described in COVID-19 series and present in 3-11.6% of patients with 
COVID-19 (31), has been associated with high ACE2 expression in the GI tract, that could 
indicate the potential of virus mutation towards increased transmissibility, decreased virulence 
and multiorgan infection (31). When GI symptoms that occur in both diseases are noted in an 
individual in an area of high SARS-CoV-2 transmission, etiological consideration must be 
given to either CD progression or COVID-19, considering its implications in terms of mutation 
and transmissibility. 

There is increasing evidence that coronaviruses are associated with neurological disorders (33).  
Studies on severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and the Middle East respiratory 
syndrome (MERS) suggest that coronaviruses are neurotropic. A systematic review of the 
literature until April 2020 associates multiple neurological disorders with COVID-19, 
including encephalitis, demyelination, and neuropathy (34).  It could potentially induce the 
development of the chagasic neuropathy which is sometimes observed in chronic CD. 

Maternal fetal transmission of T. cruzi occurs in an average of 5% of the pregnancies of mothers 
with chronic CD (35). Parasite load is a key determinant of congenital transmission (36). The 
immunological response to COVID-19 is extensive, and its impact on T. cruzi parasitic load is 
unknown. Should it be found that COVID-19 increased parasitemia in pregnant women with 
CD, it could increase the likelihood of maternal-fetal transmission. Screening of infants born 
to T. cruzi-infected mothers remains crucial and could potentially be disrupted by the negative 
impact of COVID-19 on access to care (37, 38).   

Immunosuppressed patients are at increased risk of severe COVID-19, especially those with 
aggressive underlying disease, immunosuppressive active treatment, or lymphopenia. The 
overproduction of cytokines during COVID-19 infection leads to significant tissular damage, 
particularly in the lungs. This intense inflammatory process in immunosuppressed patients 
infected by COVID-19 and CD could influence the evolution of CCC and potentially trigger 
CD reactivation due either to viral infection interference, such as in HIV infection (39), or 
possible immunosuppressive therapy for COVID-19 (9,10) associated with the severity of 
underlying diseases. Conversely, any approach to improve the immune response at this level is 
desirable, either by using antiviral or cytokine blocking agents  (IL-6, IL-1β, TNF-a) (40). On 
the other hand, we may consider the risk of inducing clinical activation of autoimmune disease 
in individuals with asymptomatic COVID-19 and, consequently, a potential reactivation of CD 
(41). 

The spread of the COVID-19 pandemic in countries affected by CD raises concerns for several 
reasons. The population with T. cruzi infection, which numbers over six million people 
worldwide (3, 42), is aging, at risk of CCC, has a significant burden of comorbidities, and is 
socioeconomically vulnerable. All of these factors could potentially increase the impact of 
COVID-19 in this population, especially within a scenario of weakened and overloaded health 
systems.  

First, although the incidence of new CD infections is around 30,000 annually (3), this number 
has declined in recent decades, meaning a high proportion of people living with CD are older 
or aging (43). While >80% of COVID-19 cases are mild or asymptomatic, severe cases are 
more common among older adults. In a retrospective study the risk of mortality increased by 
0.03-1.17 with every year of increased age in patients from Wuhan (44). Another study using 
data from various countries estimated a case fatality ratio of 4.5% in individuals older than 60, 
compared to 1.4% in those younger than 60, with the highest rates in patients over 80 (45). In 
the United States, 78.6% of deaths have occurred in people 65 or older (46).  

Over one million people in the Americas suffer from CCC (3), and underlying cardiovascular 
disease is a major risk factor for hospitalization and death from COVID-19. The incidence of 
acute cardiac injury from COVID-19 has been reported as 8% in hospitalized patients (47), and 
in one Chinese study was much more prevalent in deaths (59%) than recovering patients (1%) 
(48). Cardiovascular disease was also identified in 30% of COVID-19 related deaths in Italy 
(49), while age>60 and Charlson Comorbidity Index >3 were associated with greater mortality 
in a U.S. cohort of 1305 hospitalized patients (50). 

Finally, several studies have noted high levels of comorbidities among both patients with CD 
and those with severe forms of COVID-19. One Brazilian study identified a mean of 2.7 
chronic comorbidities in CD patients (51). In 168 CD patients in São Paulo, 51.2% had 
hypertension and 23.8% diabetes mellitus (52). Another study in a younger sample of 137 
patients in Switzerland found 2.9% had diabetes and 17% hypertension (53). Both hypertension 
and diabetes were associated with high mortality rates from COVID-19 in China (7.3 and 6.0% 
respectively) (54), and were 2-3 times more prevalent in severe vs. non-severe hospitalizations 
(47).  Diabetes was also prevalent in a third of deaths in an analysis of Italian data (55). It is 
important to note that these comorbidities also reflect the older age of the populations which 
are especially impacted by both CD and COVID-19. 

As the pandemic progresses from Europe and the United States into the Global South, it is 
increasingly impacting vulnerable populations. In the U.S., COVID-19 has thus far had a 
greater impact on Blacks and Latinos. According to the CDC, these groups have a higher 
prevalence of infection and higher weighted distribution of deaths than their share of the 
general population (56) . A higher rate of deaths among people in Brazil who self-identify as 
black has also been reported (57, 58). These racial disparities are in turn framed by historically 
rooted socioeconomic considerations which often determine who is able to self-isolate and 
avoid exposure. 

Moreover, social vulnerability has long been documented in people with CD (59), and groups 
with high burdens of CD, including indigenous people, the rural poor, and migrants may face 
particular challenges in accessing healthcare. People living at or near the poverty level are also 
especially vulnerable to the economic impact of the pandemic, as experts have warned that 
years of gains in reducing poverty are now in jeopardy. The UN predicts that as the global GDP 
shrinks by 3.2% in 2020, 34 million more people will be pushed into extreme poverty (60). The 
worsening economic situation threatens to make access to healthcare even more precarious for 
people living with CD, who are often forced to make difficult decisions between spending time 
and money on healthcare or other pressing priorities. Many work in the informal sector or in 
positions that do not offer paid time off or health insurance.  

Also, people with CD may feel more reluctant to seek care in a clinic for fear of exposure to 
COVID-19, and may, therefore, put off addressing complications related to CD. Indeed, there 
have been reports of low utilization of services and delayed presentation for chronic conditions 
since the onset of the pandemic (61, 62). Finally, CD can create a significant emotional burden 
for affected people who worry about the progression of the disease, and the pandemic may 
make it harder to access both mental health services and traditional support networks of 
families and friends. Patients with CD who acquire COVID-19 may experience particular 
concern and anxiety. As COVID-19 becomes more a part of daily reality, creative responses 
will be needed from patient groups, social workers, mental health practitioners, and others to 
continue providing support to people with CD.  

While the indications for screening and diagnosing CD are unchanged during the COVID-19 
pandemic, the timing of testing depends on the degree to which the diagnosis of Chagas disease 
will affect short term management of the individual being tested. Urgent testing remains 
appropriate for pregnant women, infants born to seropositive mothers, and any individual who 
will imminently receive immunosuppression. Screening of blood donations also remains 
critical. Patients presenting with clinical syndromes suggestive of CD should also receive 
urgent testing to guide evaluation and therapy.  Women from CD- endemic countries who are 
pregnant should also be screened to evaluate for the possibility of maternal-fetal transmission. 
At present, widespread screening of individuals without symptoms from endemic countries 
could be postponed, depending on the state of SARS-CoV-2 circulation in the community and 
local guidelines, until it can be performed safely, with the understanding that while antiparasitic 
therapy may be indicated it can generally be delayed until the patient can report for lab testing 
and follow-up visits without significant risk of exposure. 

Below preliminary recommendations are provided for patients with CD who acquire COVID-
19. The recommendations are divided depending on the patient’s form of CD.  

Acute cases of CD following congenital, vector, or oral transmission or via transfusion, laboratory 
accidents, and other routes generally warrant antiparasitic treatment as early as possible, even in the 
context of the COVID-19 pandemic. If the patient is coinfected and has both the acute form of CD and 
COVID-19, timely antiparasitic treatment of CD is also needed, but clinicians should be mindful of the 
severity of COVID-19 symptoms.  

Congenital CD: Cases of congenital transmission are acute cases of CD, and treatment is effective with 
few side effects. COVID-19 is generally not severe in infants and children (63). If the child does not 
have COVID-19 symptoms, antiparasitic treatment should be given as soon as the diagnosis of T. cruzi 
infection is established (37).   

Reactivation: Patients must be admitted to the hospital and receive antiparasitic treatment with 
benznidazole (BZN) for 60 days. However, if a full 60 days of treatment is not possible because of 
adverse events, treatment should still be continued for as close to 60 days as possible using anti-
histaminic and/or anti-inflammatory drugs. Reactivation involving myocarditis/meningoencephalitis is 
of particular concern, due to the occurrence of vascular/ nervous system/ myocardium involvement by 
COVID-19 and should be carefully monitored in the intensive care unit. 

Immunosuppression without reactivation: In this case, antiparasitic treatment could be delayed until the 
patient can safely attend clinic, depending on self-isolation guidelines and risk of exposure to COVID-
19. However, CD reactivation with signs in target organs should be closely monitored by clinical 
follow-up, direct microscopy (concentration methods) on peripheral blood and/or secretions (39), and, 
if possible, quantitative PCR during COVID-19 infection according to local protocols. 

From an individual health management point of view, people with asymptomatic infection (in 
the indeterminate clinical form of CD) are those in whom there is evidence of T. cruzi infection, 
but no evidence of organ damage (mainly cardiovascular or digestive), assessed by (1) non-
specific symptoms and (2) low sensitivity tests to detect early organ damage, such as 
electrocardiogram, chest X-ray, and barium swallow and enema (64). With or without 
antiparasitic treatment, regular monitoring is recommended to evaluate the clinical condition 
during follow-up and to quickly detect treatment failure and/or clinical progression.    

As a general recommendation, and given the current epidemiological situation, it is important 
to assess the risk-benefit of referring a patient to a healthcare center. It is essential to preserve 
patient safety in terms of preventing new cases of COVID-19. However, it is also important 
from a public health perspective to optimize existing resources for health care. Outpatient visits 
as well as regular cardiovascular and gastrointestinal tests could be delayed if CD patients are 
stable. The use of telehealth tools for virtual consultation is highly recommended, including 
incorporating advice to patients about the need to contact healthcare facilities in case of the 
onset of symptoms, either from CD or possible COVID-19 infection. 

Etiological (antiparasitic) treatment in patients with CD without evidence of organ 
involvement, is recommended for acute cases and most chronic cases in the indeterminate form 
or with only mild cardiomyopathy (5, 65). In the current context of the pandemic, however, 
two main aspects should be taken into account: 1) drug characteristics and potential interactions 
with current treatment of COVID-19, and 2) the urgency of the indication for anti-T. cruzi 
drugs. 

Benznidazole (BZN) and Nifurtimox (NFX) are the two drugs accepted by regulatory agencies 
for antiparasitic treatment of CD. Benznidazole (N-benzyl-2-nitro-1-imidazole acetamide, 
BZN) is a nitroimidazole that inhibits DNA, RNA, and protein synthesis of T. cruzi. Nifurtimox 
(5-nitrofuran 3-methyl-4-(5’- nitrofurfurylideneamine) tetrahydro-4H-1,4-tiazine-1,1- dioxide, 
NFX) is a nitrofuran derivative whose mechanism of action involves various reduction and 
oxidation reactions of its nitro constituent, leading to the production by parasite enzymes of a 
variety of reactive oxygen species that react with cellular macromolecules and are lethal to the 
parasite. NFX also leads to the inactivation of a critical trypanosomal enzyme, trypanothione 
reductase (66). 

In both cases, the mechanism of action is not completely described, and exploration of the 
potential interactions between BZN and NFX with most common drugs used in COVID-19 
management should be taken into consideration and further explored. Due to the hepatic 
metabolism of BZN (95%) and NFX (>99%), hepatotoxicity in combination with anti-COVID-
19 drugs must be monitored. 

Etiological treatment of T. cruzi infection is an emergency only under very specific 
circumstances (67). Even if adverse drug reactions (ADRs) related to BZN and NFX are non-
severe in most cases (68), close follow-up of patients who start a BZN or NFX regime is 
recommended to identify side effects promptly and to monitor hepatic and hematologic 
function (53, 69, 70). To avoid unnecessary risks, during the COVID-19 pandemic, delaying 
initiation of etiological treatment regimens for chronic T. cruzi infection without organ 
involvement is a valid course of action to avoid unnecessary exposure to COVID-19 in the 
healthcare setting, and because of limitations in follow-up due to decreased in-person care. 
Nevertheless, patients diagnosed with COVID-19 may receive immunosuppressive therapy, 
and close monitoring to diagnose CD reactivation early in its course is recommended. In the 
case of clinical and/ or parasitological evidence of reactivation, starting treatment with BZN or 
NFX is an emergency (67). 

If a patient is already receiving BZN or NFX, treatment should be continued, and self-
quarantine measures to avoid COVID-19 should be taken. Telehealth tools for treatment 
follow-up are recommended as well as minimization of contact with healthcare facilities, which 
would primarily only be indicated to perform laboratory tests usually recommended during 
treatment to monitor hepatotoxicity and hemogram alterations due to BZN or NFX, or in the 
event of concerning ADRs. If a patient under treatment with BZN or NFX develops 
symptomatic COVID-19 infection, providers could consider on a case-by-case basis whether 
to interrupt treatment, depending on the severity of symptoms and the type of treatment 
required.  There is no evidence of drug-drug interaction among antiparasitics for CD and drugs 
required to treat COVID-19, and treatment of CD in the indeterminate form is non-urgent. 

Table 1 summarizes guidance for providing etiological treatment of CD during the pandemic, 
taking into account both the patient’s form of CD and their COVID-19 status. 

In all cases, etiological treatment of Chagas disease should be accompanied by appropriate 
close follow-up including liver enzymes and blood count parameters. See Echeverria et al 2020 
(67). 

COVID-19 has been associated with multiple cardiac manifestations that include cardiac 
arrhythmias, Type 2 and 1 myocardial infarction, heart failure exacerbations and acute 
fulminant myocarditis (71, 72). Potential implications between COVID-19 and CCC may be 
expected primarily due to the common immunological pathways shared by both diseases, as 
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) is involved in heart function and the development of 
hypertension and diabetes mellitus, risk factors frequently observed in patients with CCC. 
ACE2 levels can be increased by the use of ACE inhibitors and/or angiotensin receptor blockers 
(ARBs) which are frequently used for the management of CCC. There is no evidence to date 
to support discontinuation of either ACE or ARBs based on the theoretical potential of 
increasing the susceptibility to COVID-19 infection. Most cardiovascular societies including 
ESC, ACC, AHA, CCS, and the IASC have indicated that these medications should be 
continued regardless of the presence of concomitant COVID-19 manifestations. This should 
also be true in patients with CCC.  

Other potential interactions may occur in patients with CCC currently treated for cardiac 
arrhythmias such as atrial fibrillation or life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias receiving 
amiodarone, as the potential for increased QT interval with treatments that have been proposed 
for COVID-19 such as hydroxychloroquine and/or azithromycin may increase the risk of 
torsade de points. 

Patients with CCC must continue their usual treatments during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Outpatient clinics may use telehealth if available, to avoid putting these vulnerable patients at 
risk of COVID-19 infection. With proper hygiene and self-care measures, cardiac tests like 
EKG, echo, stress tests or Holter may be performed or slightly delayed, always weighting risk-
benefit and regional SARS-CoV-2 circulation status. If a patient with CCC develops new 
arrhythmias, stroke, or acute or worsening chronic heart failure, hospitalization must not be 
delayed. As hospitals in some regions may be severely strained by COVID, care of these acute 
events may be compromised, putting CCC patients at risk. 

Table 2 lists potential interactions between cardiovascular drugs used to treat CCC and some 
proposed COVID-19 treatments. 

Our current understanding of the potential interrelations between CD and COVID-19 is still 
limited; there are substantial needs for future research. The recommendations provided in this 
document should be considered preliminary and may require refinement and adjustment as 
our understanding of both diseases develops. Table 3 lists some of the most important gaps in 
our current clinical knowledge. Research from other disciplines will also be needed to better 
understand the epidemiology of both diseases, the social and psychological impacts of the 
pandemic on people with CD, new access barriers that emerge in the context of the pandemic 
and the economic dislocation it causes, and the particular contexts of vulnerable populations 
including migrants and indigenous communities.  

While global in scope and indiscriminate in whom it infects, COVID-19 poses a particular risk 
to people with CD. Both diseases are more prevalent in marginalized populations, whose access 
to appropriate care is limited, and whose exposure to risk factors is proportionally higher. 
COVID-19 is more lethal in individuals with cardiac disease, and/or other cardiac risk factors, 
such as diabetes and obesity, which are also prevalent in individuals with CD. The mechanisms 
of COVID-19 disease, while not completely understood, theoretically pose a risk of both 
exacerbation of cardiac dysfunction from CD and acute reactivation of CD due either to 
disease-induced immunomodulation or therapeutic immunosuppression. The economic impact 
of the pandemic hits hardest in the lowest socioeconomic strata, further complicating the ability 
of many individuals with CD to obtain the care that they need for either illness. Efforts to 
mitigate the spread of COVID-19 by limiting medical facilities to all but the most urgent care 
complicates efforts to diagnose, treat, and monitor patients with CD, which may lead to clinical 
deterioration, increased maternal fetal transmission, and underdiagnosis, all of which were 
significant concerns even before the onset of the pandemic.  

Roadblocks to accessing proper care for CD were recently described in the WHF-IASC 
Roadmap on CD (5). Using a similar framework, Table 4 assesses the potential effect of the 
pandemic on key roadblocks to CD healthcare.  

The end of the pandemic in Latin America is still far from sight and its full impact on healthcare 
and healthcare access, in particular, remains to be seen. CD has long been a hidden disease, 
with low awareness among healthcare professionals and people at risk, and limited 
commitment from governments. In the short-term, as public health resources are intently 
focused on mitigating the pandemic, it could become even more of a challenge to bring 
awareness to CD. At the same time, the pandemic could serve as an opportunity to strengthen 
public concern for addressing comorbid conditions and meeting the healthcare needs of 
underserved populations. Still, the current reality requires us to rethink traditional approaches 
to CD and other neglected diseases, to ensure we continue to make progress toward their 
eradication even as new public health challenges emerge. Ultimately, neither CD nor COVID-
19 can be separated from its socioeconomic context, and winning the struggle against both 
diseases will involve implementing comprehensive programs that focus on strengthening the 
healthcare rights and access of the marginalized people who are currently most impacted.  

The authors would like to thank Marina Certo, DNDi Platforms Coordination Officer, for 
invaluable support of the writing group. DNDi is grateful to its donors, public and private, who 
have provided funding to DNDi since its inception in 2003. A full list of DNDi donors can be 
found at http://www.dndi.org/donors/donors. MASY is grateful for financial support from 
FAPESP 2012/50273-0. 
