Beginning on December 31, 2019, in China, the 
coronavirus (Sars-Cov-2)1 has been the target of studies in 
the most diverse medical fields, with cardiology as one of the 
major pillars of evolution.

Chronic diseases such as hypertension, diabetes mellitus 
and coronary artery disease dramatically increase the negative 
outcome of infected patients. According to data from the 
American College of Cardiology (ACC), in this profile of 
the general population, hospitalization levels resulting from 
COVID-19 hit 50%2

Due to infectious abnormalities resulting from infection, 
chronic comorbidities that until then were stabilized may 
tend to decompensate due to changes in O2 supply and 
demand, among other factors of physiological responses to 
septic conditions.3 

It is known that, previously, other pandemics of viral 
etiology, such as SARS and MERS, involved acute myocarditis 
with a tragic outcome from the cardiological point of view, and 
COVID-19 may be a source of acute myocarditis.4

According to data from the Brazilian Society of Cardiology 
(SBC), in March 2020, cardiovascular impairment related to 
the novel coronavirus has the following outcomes: arrhythmias 
(16%), myocardial ischemia (10%), myocarditis (7.2%) and 
shock (1–2%).5

Case report of a patient with diabetes mellitus who 
contracted the novel coronavirus in community, evolved with 
cardiac disorders and died. 

The information included in this clinical case description 
derived from reviews of medical records, interviews with the 
medical team, diagnostic imaging tests and literature reviews.

R.S.C., 33 years old, sought the emergency service at 
a municipal emergency hospital in São Caetano do Sul, 
state of São Paulo, on March 12, 2020, with unverified 
fever, body pain and wet cough for 3 days. The patient was 
evaluated by the emergency duty manager, where he was 
physically examined but presented no abnormalities, was 
medicated, presented symptoms, showed improvement and 
was discharged.

On March 14, 2020, the patient returned to the emergency 
room reporting dry cough, dyspnea and fever (39 degrees 
— measured in the early morning). Denied congestion or 
rhinorrhea. Chest radiography (Figure 1) was performed 
and the medical prescription was amoxicillin + clavulanate 
875/125 mg every 12 hours. The patient was later discharged.

On March 16, 2020, the patient returned with worsened 
sensation of dyspnea, no improvement of adynamia and 
increased dry cough; the fever had ceased, but the patient 
presented severe sweating. On physical examination, the 
patient progressed with decreased bilateral breath sounds.

A new chest X-ray was performed (Figure 2), which 
presented intense worsening, radiopacity bilaterally 
pronounced in lung fields, with supplementation of O2 by a 
nasal catheter, with slight improvement.

The emergency room team requested a place in the ward 
to clarify diagnosis and treatment.

On March 16, 2020, the patient was received at the 
emergency hospital ward and history-taking was performed 
(as described below).

Patient admitted to the ward with wet cough, fever for 
4 days, taking amoxicillin + clavulanate for 2 days without 
improvement; no travel abroad or contact with anyone with 
symptoms of COVID-19.

Diabetes with personal history, but not regular treatment. 

Admission to the ward. Glasgow 15, eupneic in O2 
catheter, acyanotic. Two-stroke regular heart rhythm; heart 
rate: 90 bpm; blood pressure: 120 x 70 mmHg. Globally 
decreased vesicular murmur with sparse diffuse snores. 
Chest radiography, radiopacity bilaterally pronounced in 
the lung fields.

Laboratory tests on March 16, 2020: Hb: 15,5; leukocytes: 
16,150 mil; band cells: 323; Vhs: 23; Na: 135; K: 4.3; urea: 
2; creatinine: 0,6; CRP: 23,6; blood glucose: 344.

Diagnostic hypothesis of pneumonia and decompensated 
diabetes was suggested. 

Request for chest tomography, respiratory isolation, 
COVID-19 investigation (swab and CRP).

Piperacillin + tazobactan 4.5 mg every 6 hours was 
initiated, dextro-transposition. 

On March 17, 2020, the patient evolved with general 
malaise, fever (38.3 °C), refractory to medication; 85% 
desaturation in O2 3L/min; tachycardia, 104 bpm; tachypneic; 
84 ipm; blood pressure: 120x70 mmHg.

Tachycardiac heart rhythm with muffled heart sounds, chest 
pain, jugular venous distension with signs of diastolic dysfunction.

Vesicular murmur with crackles all across the right hemithorax.

On March 17, 2020, electrocardiography presented no 
signs of ischemia.

Laboratory tests on March 17, 2020: Hb: 14,2; hT: 41%; 
leukocytosis: 15.030; platelets: 143 mil; CRP: 25; urea: 36; 
creatinine: 0.60; Na: 135; K: 4.2.

Hypothesis of pulmonary focus sepsis; viral etiology. The patient 
opted for a definitive airway with orotracheal intubation.

Blood pressure: 154x91 mmHg; HR: 48; bpm sat O2: 
82%; FiO2: 100%; Peep: 12 bpm; controlled blood pressure:

Due to hemodynamic instability, the patient was kept in 
the emergency room waiting for a place in the intensive care 
unit (ICU). Computed tomography (CT) of the chest (Figures 
3 to 6) revealed selective intubation of the right mainstem 
bronchus; extensive ground-glass opacity in both lungs, 
affecting all lobes predominantly in the lower lobes, which 
present consolidations with air bronchograms, suggesting 
inflammation/infection. Viral etiology cannot be ruled out. 
Presence of myocardial edema secondary to an inflammatory 
process associated with myocardial wall thickening with a slight 
increase in the cardiac area.

New successful orotracheal intubation, antibiotic therapy 
and measures for acute respiratory failure maintained.

On March 18, 2020, the patient developed general 
malaise — tachycardia, sedated, tachydyspneic (Ramsey 6), 
on mechanical ventilation.

Tachycardiac cardiac rhythm, with hypophonesis of b1 and 
b3 in outline, presence of jugular venous distension, edema 
on lower limbs 1/4+.

Vesicular murmur with diffuse snores.

Observation for acute myocarditis + pulmonary focus 
sepsis was initiated.

Antibiotic therapy associated with hemodynamic 
monitoring was maintained if necessary; initiation of 
vasoactive drug.

ICU spot was provided at Hospital das Clínicas (HC) 
de São Paulo, but the patient died on admission due to 
respiratory failure — COVID-19.

Relevant findings:

On March 17, 2020, additional tests presented the 
following findings:

• Quantitative troponin: 0.49 ng/dl

• D-dimer: 0.1 mg/L

• Venous lactate: 2.0 mmol/L

• Rapid HIV test: negative

Oropharyngeal swab (rapid test for COVID-19) was 
performed on March 17, 2020 and tested negative; however, 
it is clear that the specificity of nasal swab is around 63%, so 
it is used in the first screening.

The gold standard test for detecting COVID-19 consists of 
collecting in vivo or post-mortem CRP samples (2019-nCoV 
CRP), which tested positive (collected on March 19, 2020 — 
post-mortem). The tests performed in the state of São Paulo 
— sourced from the Brazilian public health system (SUS) — 
were analyzed by Instituto Adolfo Lutz Central, completing 
diagnosis of infection with the novel coronavirus.

In view of the current pandemic and a disease still under 
investigation, we cannot rule out infection among young 
people and children, especially those with chronic conditions. 
Reports of clinical experience demonstrate that many patients 
aged 20 to 40 are being infected by the novel coronavirus, 
developing multiple comorbidities associated with the infection.

Cardiac involvement, which leads to acute heart failure, 
has been identified as one of the major sources of secondary 
complications, with reserved outcome, without specific 
therapy, except for the classic follow-up of acute heart failure 
as recommended in our guidelines, in addition to control of 
the focus of infection. 

The cardiovascular outcome is a real possibility in the 
clinical experience of the novel coronavirus pandemic, 
requiring monitoring and follow-up of acute heart failure.6

Clinical signs should always guide us to consider these 
possibilities, in addition to keeping an eye for myocarditis.

Complementary tests such as CT and chest radiography 
are useful for investigation, and echocardiography can 
facilitate management. It is worth noting that it is not 
often available in emergency care units in order to have its 
operator-dependent results.

Due to the severity of the patients’ conditions (mostly under 
mechanical ventilation), cardiac resonance imaging is not of 
great value as it cannot be performed.6

We corroborate the need for history-taking and thorough 
clinical/cardiological evaluation of such patient profile in order 
to minimize unfavorable outcomes. 
