Rev Col Bras Cir 47:e20202586
DOI: 10.1590/0100-6991e-20202586
Quality of search – sample size
Qualidade da pesquisa – tamanho amostral 
Álida Rosária Silva Ferreira1
T
he scientific production, among the various situations 
surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic, has discussed 
the outcomes related to various clinical situations. The in-
creased number of publications is a reality.  
In a retrospective study, it was reported that 
four patients with previous unknown coronavirus, who 
had undergone elective surgery, had postoperative com-
plications. The authors conclude that carrying out elective 
procedures, at the moment, maybe associated with incre-
ased risks without any benefits1. 
The question that arises from a study like this 
is: what is its quality with such a small sample? Wouldn’t 
the interpretations be flawed? If these questions are not 
clear, the results can lead many professionals to take de-
cisions based on unreliable studies.
From a statistical point of view, the sample size 
is a fundamental methodological tenet, when the final 
objective of the study is to extrapolate the results from 
that sample to the entire population. A sample calcula-
tion is, along with the randomization process and good 
data collection and processing, an important step to cer-
tify the quality of a study and generalize its results2. 
However, in times of global crisis, more specific 
and quicker studies have been the routine. These can su-
pport practices often adopted by the Healthcare System, 
but which need scientific background to support decision 
making. 
What needs to be clear to the healthcare pro-
fessionals and administrators is that this type of study has 
many limitations. Therefore, such study needs to be care-
fully assessed in order to avoid wrong decisions that will 
certainly have a huge impact on the population, whether 
if it is a patient who has/had the new virus, or one who 
is waiting for an operation. And for the latter, the opera-
tion is a crucial therapy (such as in cancer) and may help 
improve his/her quality of life.
1 - Federal University of Minas Gerais (UFMG), Minas Gerais – MG – Brazil.
The statistician’s corner
	
REFERENCES
1.	
Aminian A, Safari S, Razeghian-Jahromi A, Ghorbani M, 
Delaney CP. COVID-19 outbreak and surgical practice: 
unexpected fatality in perioperative period. Ann Surg. 
2020 Mar 26. doi: 10.1097/SLA.0000000000003925. 
2.	
Farias AA, César CC, Soares JF. Introdução à Estatística. 
Rio de Janeiro: LTC; 2003.
