Objective: To evaluate the associations of moderate to vigorous physical activity (MVPA), vigorous physical activity (VPA), moderate physical activity (MPA), and sedentary behavior (SB) with depressive, anxiety, and co-occurring depressive and anxiety symptoms (D&A) during the COVID-19 pandemic in Brazil.
Methods: Cross-sectional online survey in self-isolating people. Self-reported MVPA, VPA, MPA, and SB (exposures), and depressive and anxiety symptoms (Beck Depression and Anxiety Inventories [BDI and BAI]) were collected. Associations of MVPA, VPA, MPA, and SB with prevalent depressive (BDI>9), anxiety (BAI>7), and D&A (BDI>9+BAI>7) symptoms were investigated using logistic regressions, presented as odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence interval (95%CI). Linear regressions were performed testing associations with symptom severity. Models were adjusted for confounding factors.
Results: Participants (n=937, females=72.3%) performing ≥30 min/day MVPA or ≥15 min/day VPA had lower odds of prevalent depressive (ORMVPA=0.71, 95%CI=0.53-0.96; ORVPA=0.60, 95%CI=0.43-0.82), anxiety (ORMVPA=0.71, 95%CI=0.54-0.96; ORVPA=0.70, 95%CI=0.51- 0.96), and co-occurring D&A symptoms (ORMVPA=0.71, 95%CI=0.52-0.96; ORVPA=0.59, 95%CI=0.41-0.83). People spending ≥10 h/day sedentary were more likely to have depressive symptoms (OR=1.39,95%CI=1.02-1.90). Each hour spent in SB corresponded to 0.22 (95%CI=0.10-0.33) points and 0.16 (95%CI=0.02-0.31) points higher on the BDI and BAI, respectively.
Conclusion: Higher MVPA and VPA levels are associated with lower odds of depressive, anxiety and D&A symptoms. Higher SB is associated with higher odds of depressive symptoms.
The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), is a global public health emergency. Up to the 13th of May, over 4 million cases and 280 thousand deaths worldwide were reported1. In Brazil, to that date, over 160 thousand cases and 11 thousand deaths have been notified1. To decrease the spread of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, the World Health Organization (WHO) recommended the adoption of physical distancing measures by national governments1. In Brazil, the epidemiological report number 05 of the Ministry of Health has proposed social distancing measures, including self-isolation for areas with community transmission2. Self- isolation measures are deemed to limit the circulation of the individual in society, thus limiting contact with other individuals. During self-isolation in Brazil, there is a “stay at home” recommendation, asking people going out in public only for essential activities, such as going to the supermarkets or pharmacies or to use essential services for subsistence, such as medical assistance. Yet the national recommendation is to stay at home, each one of the 27 federative units of Brazil can decide about the adoption and implementation of more restrictive measures (quarantine/lockdown).
Prediction models suggest that the early implementation of physical distancing would result in averting almost 90,000 deaths in the largest metropolitan area in Brazil3. While self- isolation measures are necessary to reduce the infection rate4, those measures, together with the “pandemic fear”5, 6 might be associated with a negative burden on mental health, possibly increasing depressive and anxiety symptoms7, 8. Therefore, strategies to mitigate the present and future impact of this mental health burden are necessary9.
A substantial body of evidence suggests that regular moderate to vigorous physical activity (MVPA), defined as any bodily movement produced by skeletal muscles that require energy expenditure10 performed at moderate or vigorous intensities, is associated with a lower prevalence of depressive11, 12 and anxiety symptoms12, 13 in the general population, including low-middle income countries. Also, MVPA is linked to a lower likelihood of incident depression and anxiety globally14, 15. On the other hand, high levels of sedentary behavior (SB), defined as any waking behaviour characterized by an energy expenditure ≤1.5 METs while in a sitting, reclining or lying posture16, are associated with an increased risk of depressive17, 18 and anxiety symptoms19.
Physical distancing and self-isolation measures result in reduced opportunities for MVPA practice since stadiums, parks, and gyms are closed. Moreover, multiple leisure activities available for those in self-isolation at home include sedentary activities, such as watching television, and seated computer activities. Given the potential influence of the COVID-19 crisis on lifestyle behaviours, depressive and anxiety symptoms, and the known association between depressive and anxiety symptoms, it is essential to understand the potential relationship between MVPA and SB with depressive/anxiety symptoms in the context of COVID-19.
To the best of our knowledge, no study has evaluated the associations between MVPA, and SB with depressive, anxiety, and co-occurring depressive and anxiety (D&A) symptoms during the COVID-19 pandemic. The present study aimed to 1) examine levels of MVPA, and SB during the COVID-19 pandemic in Brazil; 2) examine the presence of depressive, anxiety, and D&A symptoms in Brazil; 3) explore associations between MVPA, and SB with depressive, anxiety, and D&A symptoms; and 4) explore associations of different intensities (vigorous physical activity [VPA] or moderate physical activity [MPA]) with depressive, anxiety, and co- occurring D&A symptoms.
This paper presents data from a cross-sectional study collected via an online survey. The study was approved by the Federal University of Santa Maria Research Ethics Committee and by the National Commission of Ethics in Research [CONEP] (30244620.1.0000.5346).
Participants were recruited through social media and by distributing an invitation to participate through existing researcher networks. Brazilians adults (≥18 years), currently residing in Brazil and in self-isolation due to the COVID-19 pandemic, were eligible to participate. By self-isolation, we mean those that decided to stay-at-home and only left for essential activities such as food shopping, visit the pharmacist or other health professionals. Participants were directed to an encrypted data website (www.qualtrics.com) where they indicated their consent to participate after reading an information sheet.
The co-primary outcomes were symptoms of depression and anxiety and/or these co- occurring together.
Depressive symptoms were assessed using the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI). The BDI is composed of 21 items. Each item consists of a series of four statements based on the severity of depressive symptoms. The score of each item varies from 0 (minimum score) to 3 maximum score). The overall score of the instrument range from 0 to 63. Scores ranging from 0-9 indicate minimal/no depressive; 10-18 indicate mild to moderate depressive symptoms; 19-29 indicate moderate to severe depressive symptoms, and 30-63 indicate severe depressive symptoms20. For this study, depression was dichotomized into no depressive symptoms (0-9) or prevalent depressive symptoms (10-63)20.
Anxiety symptoms were assessed using the Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI). The BAI is composed of 21 items. Each item consists of a different anxiety symptom in which the participant scores how he/she felt in relation to that symptom during the last month, on a scale that varies from 0 (Not at all) to 3 (Severely, it bothered me a lot). The overall scores range from 0 to 63. Scores ranging from 0-7 indicate minimal/no anxiety symptoms; 8-15 indicate mild anxiety symptoms; 16-25 indicate moderate anxiety symptoms, and 26-63 indicate severe anxiety symptoms21. For the study purpose, anxiety was dichotomized into absent anxiety symptoms (0-7) or prevalent anxiety symptoms (8-63)21.
Those with prevalent depressive symptoms (BDI>9) and prevalent anxiety symptoms (BAI>7) were classified as having co-occurring D&A symptoms. Prevalent co-occurring D&A symptoms was treated as a dichotomous variable.
Time spent in MVPA was assessed by two questions: 1) “How much time on an average day have you spent in vigorous physical activity since self-isolating?”; and 2) “How much time on an average day have you spent in moderate physical activity since self-isolating?”. The questions were accompanied by the following explanations: “Think about all the vigorous and moderate activities that you do on average daily during self-isolating. Vigorous physical activities refer to activities that take hard physical effort and make you breathe much harder than normal. Moderate activities refer to activities that take moderate physical effort and make you breathe somewhat harder than normal”. For the logistic models, MVPA, moderate physical activity (MPA), and vigorous physical activity (VPA) when self-isolating were treated as dichotomous variables. MVPA and MPA were dichotomized into 1 = <30 minutes per day, or 2 = ≥30 minutes per day. VPA was dichotomized into 1 = <15 minutes per day, or 2 = ≥15 minutes of VPA per day). These cut-offs were chosen to be in line with the public health recommendations of 150 minutes of MVPA, or 75 minutes of VPA per week22.
Time spent in SB was assessed using the question: “Since self-isolating, how much time have you spent sitting daily?”. SB was treated as a dichotomous variable (1= <10 hours spent sitting per day; 2 = ≥10 hours or more spent sitting per day), as used in previous studies23, 24.
Demographic data were collected, including sex (male or female), age (in 10-year age bands), ethnicity (asian, black, caucasian, mixed, other), marital status (single, separated/divorced, widowed or married/in a domestic partnership), employment (Unemployed, Student, Military, Self-employed or Retired), and household income (i.e., <R$1254, R$1255-R$2004, R$2005-R$8640, R$8641-R$11261, >R$11262), and Brazilian state they lived in. Participants were asked whether they are in self-isolation and to report the number of days in self-isolation. Substance consumption, such as current smoking status (yes or no), and current alcohol consumption (yes or no) were evaluated. Self-reported previous diagnosis of chronic physical conditions (e.g.: obesity, hypertension, myocardial infarction, angina pectoris and other coronary diseases, other cardiac diseases, varicose veins of lower extremities, osteoarthritis, chronic neck pain, chronic low back pain, chronic allergy [excluding allergic asthma], asthma [including allergic asthma], chronic bronchitis, emphysema or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD], type 1 diabetes, type 2 diabetes, diabetic retinopathy, cataract, peptic ulcer disease, urinary incontinence or urine control problems, hypercholesterolaemia, chronic skin disease, chronic constipation, liver cirrhosis and other hepatic disorders, stroke, chronic migraine and other frequent chronic headaches, haemorrhoids, cancer, osteoporosis, thyroid disease, renal disease, and injuries), as well as, previous diagnosis of psychiatric conditions (e.g.: depression, anxiety, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia or others) were also evaluated through self-reported questions. For these questions, a list with all the above-mentioned conditions was shown.
Sample characteristics were displayed for the whole overall sample and stratified according to the time spent in MVPA (≥30 minutes vs. <30 minutes per day), and time spent in SB (<10 hours vs. ≥10 hours per day). Descriptive data are shown using mean (standard deviation), or median and interquartile range (IQR) for continuous variables. Categoric variables are shown as the total number of cases (%). The differences in the median depressive and anxiety symptoms between MVPA or SB levels were tested using Mann-Whitney U tests. The associations between MVPA or SB with the prevalence of symptoms of mental health outcomes (depressive, anxiety, or D&A) were tested with models of logistic regressions and 95% CI. We also tested the associations across different intensities (VPA and MPA) with prevalent depressive, anxiety, and co-occurring D&A symptoms. First, the models were tested without adjustments (crude). Second, the models were adjusted for age (categoric, 10-year age band) and sex (men/women) (adjusted 1). Third, the models were adjusted for age, sex, ethnicity (categoric), marital status (categoric), family income (categoric), days in self-isolation (continuous), current smoking (yes/no), current alcohol consumption (yes/no), previous diagnosis of chronic diseases (yes/no), previous diagnosis of psychiatric disorders (yes/no), time spent sitting per day (continuous; for MVPA, VPA and MPA models) or time spent in MVPA (continuous; for SB models) (adjusted 2). Results from the logistic regression analysis are presented as odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs). The adjusted mean differences (AMD) in depressive and anxiety symptoms according to MVPA (≥30 minutes vs. <30 minutes per day) or SB (≥10 hours vs. <10 hours per day) levels were calculated using analyses of covariance (ANCOVAS), adjusting for the same variables used in the logistic regression models. Linear regressions were performed using continuous data for MVPA, VPA, MPA, SB, and depressive and anxiety symptoms. Models tested for linear regressions were the same used in logistic models. We adopted a statistical significance level at p <0.05. The statistical analysis was performed with SPSS version 22.0 (IBM Corporation).
A total of 937 adults were included in the study. The sample was predominantly composed by women (72.3%), young adults (52.6%) of participants aged 18-35 years, Caucasians (76.0%), singles (50.1%), currently employed (50.1%), with a monthly household income ranging from R$2005-R$11261 (56.9%). Most participants were non-smokers (94.9%) but were consuming alcoholic beverages during the self-isolation (68.8%). The overall cohort reported engaging in a median of 30 (IQR=60.00) minutes of MVPA per day, and spending an median of 10.0 (IQR=5.0), hours per day in SB. A total of 500 participants (53.4%) spent ≥30 minutes of MVPA per day, and 311 (33.3%) spent ≥10 hours in SB per day. The prevalence of self-reported previous diagnosis of chronic physical conditions (any disease) was 93.3%. The prevalence of self-reported previous diagnosis of psychiatric disorders (any disorder) was 41.0% (depression=20.0%, any anxiety disorder=24.4%, bipolar disorder=2.0%, schizophrenia or other psychotic disorders=0.1%). The full details of the overall sample, and according to the time spent in MVPA and SB are detailed in table 1.
The median of depressive symptoms in the overall sample was 9.00 (IQR=10.00), mean=9.98 (7.60), points in the BDI scale. Those that reported ≥30 minutes in MVPA per day reported lower depressive symptoms than those that spent <30 minutes per day in MVPA (AMD= -0.707; 95%CI= -1.160 to -0.253, p=0.002). Also, those that spent <10 hours in SB per day reported lower depressive symptoms than those that spent ≥10 hours in SB per day (AMD= -1.736, 95%CI= -2.704 to -0.768, p<0.001).
The median of anxiety symptoms in the overall sample was 6.00 (IQR=11.0), mean =9.01 (9.12) points in the BAI score scale. Those that spent ≥30 minutes in MVPA reported lower anxiety symptoms than those that spent <30 minutes per day in MVPA (AMD= -0.759; 95%CI= -1.312 to -0.206, p=0.007). Also, those that spent <10 hours in SB per day reported lower anxiety symptoms than those that spent ≥10 hours in SB per day (AMD= -1.665; 95%CI= -2.869 to -0.461, p=0.007).
The prevalence of symptoms of depressive, anxiety, and D&A in the cohort were 43.6%, 43.3%, and 31.9%, respectively. The prevalence of depressive, anxiety, and comorbid D&A symptoms, per MVPA and SB group can be seen in figure 1.
Those reporting ≥30 minutes in MVPA had a decreased odds of prevalent depressive (OR=0.71, 95%CI=0.53-0.96), anxiety (OR=0.72, 95%CI=0.54-0.96), and co-occurring D&A (OR=0.71, 95%CI=0.52-0.96) symptoms when adjusting for potential covariates. Those spending ≥10 hours per day in SB were more likely to present prevalent depressive symptoms (OR=1.39, 95%CI=1.02-1.90) in the most adjusted analyses. The detailed results of the logistic regression models are presented in table 2. Linear associations, adjusting for relevant covariates, demonstrate that each hour spent in SB is associated with 0.22 points higher on the BDI (95%CI=0.104-0.338) and 0.16 points higher at the BAI (95%=CI=0.021-0.313). The linear models for MVPA and SB are shown in table 3.
When we look across different MVPA intensities, spending ≥15 minutes per day in VPA is associated with lower odds of prevalent depressive (OR=0.60, 95%CI=0.43-0.82), anxiety (OR=0.70, 95%CI=0.51-0.96), and co-occurring D&A (OR=0.59, 95%CI=0.41-0.83) symptoms. Spending ≥30 minutes per day in MPA is associated with a lower prevalence of co- occurring D&A symptoms (OR=0.72, 95%CI=0.53-0.98) (Table 4). Linear regression models found that every 10 minutes spent in VPA is associated with 0.18 (95%CI=0.041-0.335) points lower on the BDI, and -0.21 (95%CI=0.034-0.400) points lower on the BAI scales, respectively (table 5).
This is, to the best of our knowledge, the first study assessing the association between MVPA, VPA, MPA, and SB and prevalent depressive, anxiety, and co-occurring D&A symptoms among self-isolating adults during the COVID-19 pandemic. In the present study, nearly half of participants reported performing ≥30 minutes MVPA per day, and one third reported spending ≥10 hours in SB per day. The prevalence of depressive and anxiety symptoms was approximately 40%, while one third reported co-occurring D&A and anxiety symptoms. We observed a relationship suggesting that people reporting ≥30 minutes in MVPA per day were approximately 30% less likely to present depressive, anxiety, and D&A symptoms, even when we adjust for relevant covariates. Those reporting ≥15 minutes of VPA per day were approximately 40% less likely to present with prevalent depressive and D&A symptoms, and 30% less likely to present prevalent anxiety symptoms. Those spending ≥10 hours a day in SB were 39% more likely to present prevalent depressive symptoms in the adjusted models.
The present study found a high prevalence of depressive, anxiety, and comorbid D&A symptoms in a sample of the Brazilian population during COVID-19 pandemic. Although the average severity of depressive and anxiety symptoms of the sample falls within the range of mild symptoms, the prevalence of depressive symptoms is about four times higher than those found in previous studies in Brazil using similar screening tools25. Other studies also found high prevalences of depressive and anxiety symptoms in the general population during the COVID- 19 pandemics in Paraguay (depression=59.6%, anxiety=47.2%)26, Turkey (moderate to severe depression=18.6%, moderate to severe anxiety=26.5%)27, China (depression=48.1%, anxiety=22.6%, D&A=19.4%)8, and Basque region of Spain (depression=20.8%, anxiety=29.0%). Our study is not representative of the general population and the results should be interpreted taking the potential for self-selection bias into account, also, we have used a screening tool that is not able to diagnose depressive or anxiety disorders25 . However, the high prevalence of symptoms found is suggestive that the pandemic and the self-isolation are impacting mental health5, 6. Accordingly, epidemiological studies to precisely estimate the real mental health burden in the population are required. In the meanwhile, even not being representative, and potentially overestimated, the findings indicate that governing bodies should take initiatives to reduce the mental health burden during periods that the general population is requested to isolate themselves.
In the early days of the COVID-19 outbreak in China, a cross-sectional study found that nearly 60% of participants did not meet the PA recommendations (<150 minutes of MVPA per week). Moreover, they have found an association of PA levels with fewer negative affect28. Our findings are in line with the association found in China, suggesting that over 30 minutes of daily MVPA is associated with reduced co-occurring depressive and anxiety symptoms. In our study, 15 minutes or over of VPA per day was associated with a lower prevalence of depressive, anxiety, and co-occurring D&A symptoms. Also, we found a linear association with depressive and anxiety symptoms severity, suggesting a dose-response association. However, no linear associations were seen in the present study between MPA or MVPA with depressive and anxiety symptoms when we adjust for covariates. A potential explanation is that during the pandemics, time spent in MPA might be heavily influenced by time spent in household activities as most household activities fall within this intensity range29. In turn, VPA might more closely reflect leisure-time physical activity. According to previous evidence, leisure-time PA is more likely to be associated with positive mental health outcomes12 than household activities and those expending long periods in household activities might not be experiencing the same benefits.
We found significant associations between increased time spent in SB and depression and anxiety symptom severity when adjusting for covariates such as time spent in MVPA. Moreover, those spending over 10 hours in SB per day were more likely to present prevalent depressive, but not anxiety or co-occurring D&A symptoms18, 30. This difference might be explained by the fact that periods longer than 10 hours per day of SB are needed to impact significantly in the presence of significant anxiety symptoms17.
While our data are cross-sectional and directionality is unclear, previous longitudinal14, 15, mendelian randomisation31 and randomised trials32 support the notion that MVPA protects against and improves depressive and anxiety symptoms. Assuming that MVPA is protective against depressive and anxiety symptoms, these effects can be explained by some underlying mechanisms. First, MVPA can increase the release of endocannabinoids, which has antidepressant and anxiolytic effects33. Second, MVPA improves neuroplasticity and functions on the brain, reflected by the increase of neurotrophic factors, such as brain-derived neurotrophic factors (BDNF)34. The changes in BDNF levels seem to be associated with the antidepressant effects of exercise35. Third, evidence suggests that MVPA can fortify the anti- inflammatory and antioxidant systems, which are increased in depressive and anxiety disorders36. On the other hand, randomized controlled trials have demonstrated that inducing SB increases depressive symptoms, and this effect is partially mediated by an increase in inflammatory markers37. Fourth, there is a large body of literature about the risks of infection, casualties and other anxiogenic content available being consumed during the self-isolation38, so the time spent in MVPA can also work as a distraction when participants are focusing in the activity, and not ruminating that specific information. Fifth, psychosocial mechanisms including social connectivity may be key mechanisms that contribute to the antidepressant effect of exercise. For example, those who are more physically active may engage in more social interaction when participating in group exercise classes as using social media/online social interaction is associated with positive affect during the COVID-19 pandemic39. Lastly, a body of evidence suggests that there is a bidirectional relationship between MVPA and SB with depressive symptoms and anxiety, so it is expected that people with depressive and anxiety symptoms are less likely to be active and more sedentary40.
Strategies to promote MVPA practice should be adapted to this context, in terms of both the current response to COVID-19 and the amelioration of it’s future impacts on mental health. Besides, exercise seems to reduce the severity of acute respiratory symptoms in the general population41, however, there is yet no study evaluating the protective effects or safety of exercise in people with COVID-19 infection. At this moment, we suggest that exercise professionals should be alert to the potential signs of COVID-19 infection. Therefore, a brief screening of COVID-19 symptoms might be necessary before engaging in MVPA42. When signs and symptoms of infection are detected, the participant should refrain from MVPA and follow the local health department recommendations.
The present study has some limitations. First, the cross-sectional design does not allow to draw any directionality in the relationship. Further longitudinal data can further clarify the potential protective effects of MVPA against the development of depression and anxiety during the self-isolation. Second, the sample was mostly composed of females and young adults recruited by social media (Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, and emails sent to a network of researchers. Although there is data of participants from 24 of the 27 Brazilian states, about 62% of participants are from Rio Grande do Sul, 14.8% from Rio de Janeiro, and 6.5% from Ceará states. Therefore, the representativeness of this sample is limited. Third, we could not rule out a sampling bias as those who are experiencing more depressive and anxiety symptoms might be more interested in participating in the study (self-selection bias), causing an exaggerated prevalence. Fourth, all data was collected using a self-report online survey. Self-reported data can suffer from recall bias, as well as, by social desirability. Last, we could not explore whether PA was performed during leisure-time or in other domains. Further studies should evaluate the role of the different domains that PA is performed in the associations between MVPA and depressive and anxiety during COVID-19 pandemic.
People engaged in higher levels of MVPA and VPA are less likely to present depressive, anxiety, and D&A symptoms during self-isolation. Those reporting higher levels of SB are more likely to present prevalent depressive symptoms. Strategies targeting to increase MVPA and VPA and reduce SB at populational levels might be important to mitigate the mental health burden during the COVID-19 pandemics. Public health recommendations should make clear to the general population how to exercise safely.
This study was part financed in part by the Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior - Brasil (CAPES) - Finance Code 001. Joseph Firth is supported by a University of Manchester Presidential Fellowship (P123958) and a UK Research and Innovation Future Leaders Fellowship (MR/T021780/1). Brendon Stubbs is supported by a Clinical Lectureship (ICA-CL-2017-03-001) jointly funded by Health Education England (HEE) and the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR). Brendon Stubbs is part funded by the NIHR Biomedical Research Centre at South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust. The views expressed are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the (partner organisation), the NHS, the NIHR or the Department of Health and Social Care. Mark Tully is partly supported by funding as Director of the Northern Ireland Public Health Research Network by the Research and Development Division of the Public Health Agency (Northern Ireland).