Covid-19 was initially notified in February, 2020, in Brazil, and the first death was 
reported on March 171. Since then, national spread has been rapid, with over 9,000 deaths 
reported less than two months later2. These deaths refer to people who tested positive 
for the polymerase chain reaction test (PCR), which detects the genetic material of 
SARS‑CoV-2 and establishes the presence of the virus. This figure, however, represents 
only the tip of the iceberg, because the PCR test has been performed with priority on 
hospitalized patients under suspicion of having the disease and, in some states, as a 
post-mortem exam3. It can be deduced that there are certainly many deaths from suspected 
cases without a confirmed diagnosis. Thus, two major challenges are how to estimate 
the degree of underreported deaths due to Covid-19 and what the actual number is.

Cause of death information is gathered from the death certificate (DC), a standard 
international document that should be filled out by doctors in Brazil. In a DC, the cause(s) 
of death is(are) declared in Part I (immediate, intervening, and underlying cause). For mor-
tality statistics purposes, the underlying cause of death (COD) is selected, which should be 
the cause stated on the lowest used line of the DC, if the causal sequence leading to death 
was filled in correctly. The underlying COD is the disease or circumstances of injuries that 
initiated the chain of events leading to death4. In the case of disease due to SARS-CoV-2, 
the COD must be reported as Covid-19, and clinical suspicion without laboratory results, as 
suspected Covid-19. Pre-existing comorbidities responsible for worsening the disease should 
not be considered the underlying COD 5.

The DC form is issued in three copies, the first (white) copy for the municipal, state 
and federal health services, responsible for monitoring causes of death with the Mortality 
Information System (Sistema de Informações Sobre Mortalidade – SIM). The second copy (­yellow) 
is destined to the Civil Registry (CR) notary offices for the registration of the death and 
the drawing up of a copy of the DC to the family, which are essential to proceed with the 
burial. The third copy (pink) must be retained by the issuing institution4. 

For the insertion of deaths in the SIM, the death surveillance service of the health 
municipal department performs an active search for the DC in hospitals and other estab-
lishments, and/or notary offices, and uses international standardized rules for selecting 
the underlying COD. In the case of deaths that have not yet been confirmed as Covid‑19, 
an attempt is made to streamline the routine process of investigating unspecified causes 
with an active search in medical records of hospitals and laboratories for the qualifi-
cation and confirmation of the disease. Deaths captured at the municipal department 
are transferred to the state  and to the federal level, to consolidate the national base6. 
Because of qualification processes in the mortality information system, there is a delay 
in the final registration in the system, which may vary according to different municipal-
ities and causes. 

Deaths registered in notary offices across the country make up the CR statistics system, 
coordinated by the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (Instituto Brasileiro de 
Geografia e Estatística – IBGE). This system, based on data from notary registrations, does 
not have the function of monitoring vital events occurring in the territory, but it contributes 
for the timely detection by municipal, state and federal health services of atypical occur-
rences in the various locations throughout the country.

Over the last 10 years, it is estimated that the two systems, CR and SIM, have captured 
almost the total number of deaths that occur in large urban centers where the epidemic is 
concentrated. However, for a substantial proportion the cause of death is still ill-defined 
or imprecise (35% of deaths investigated in 60 cities in 2017)7. In the case of Covid-19, it 
is most likely that there is an expressive underreporting of deaths due to the difficulty in 
identifying the cases, considering that many did not have material collection for the PCR 
test. Even with samples collected, countless individuals evolve to death before having their 
results released. In addition, collection quality problems, since collecting specimens late or 
very early in the infection period as well as  not handling and shipping them appropriately, 
may be responsible for false negative results8. Therefore, the timely inclusion of confirmed 
cases of Covid-19 in the SIM depends on the physician having adequate results of the PCR 
test available when filling in the DC. 

The major problem, however, concerns the criterion of suspected Covid-19 cases. 
Given the delay in the release of a national protocol by the Brazilian Ministry of Health to 
standardize the adequate completion of DCs due to the disease, some institutions3 have 
issued guidelines that differ from those recommended by the World Health Organization 
(WHO). The WHO proposes to consider as suspected case of Covid-19 all cases with clin-
ically compatible disease even without confirmatory laboratory results.5. In the epidemic, 
the poor completion of the DC is reinforced by the limited or non-existent medical care 
during the terminal illness and by the precarious working conditions of physicians in 
urgent and emergency settings. Thus, a high proportion of deaths from Covid-19 stated 
as other causes could compromise the understanding of the real magnitude of mortality 
from this specific cause.

The disease caused by the new coronavirus was initially detected in China with the inves-
tigation of seven cases of pneumonia of unknown etiology that occurred in late December 
2019 in hospitalized patients, and which evolved into a severe acute respiratory syndrome 
(SARS)9. Therefore, pneumonia and SARS are causes that are part of the causal sequence of 
severe cases of Covid-19 which progress to death, and sepsis is also a possible complication10. 
Deaths classified as respiratory failure or ill-defined/undetermined causes conceal other 
causes, and the underlying COD can be any other specific cause. Research results for inves-
tigation of respiratory failure performed in 2017 on medical records, indicate that this diag-
nosis is the result of different underlying CODs, from chronic diseases, such as cardiovascu-
lar diseases (24% of 518 reclassified cases) to external causes11 (Table 1). Ill-defined causes 
and sepsis had a similar pattern in previous investigations,  indicating that they also hide a 
huge variety of underlying CODs12,13. 

The CR data on death in the recent Covid Registral panel, made available by the National 
Association of Natural Persons Registers (Associação Nacional dos Registradores de Pessoas 
Naturais – ARPEN Brasil)14, come from the country’s notary offices. A single cause of 
death was selected according to hierarchical criteria for the causes stated in the certificate. 
Endeavouring to measure mortality from coronavirus, deaths that had Covid-19 mentioned 
in the DC were identified, followed by deaths with mention of acute respiratory syndrome 
and those with pneumonia mentioned with no mention of SARS; finally, those with respira-
tory failure (with or without mentioned sepsis), and sepsis and ill-defined causes when they 
were the unique stated causes14. It appears that SARS increased in capital cities where there 
was an increase in confirmed cases of Covid-19 (data not shown) in 2020. When analyzing 
three capital cities with a higher increase in cases of Covid-19 (Figure 1), an important rise 
in respiratory failure is observed as cause of death in São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro, whereas 
there was also an increase in mentioned pneumonia deaths in Manaus.  

The CR data, despite having some limitations, indicate that deaths from coronavirus are 
probably included among deaths registered as other causes, with different behavior patterns 
in the municipalities. It then becomes urgent and necessary to face the challenge of building 
a picture closer to reality about the epidemic, which heavily impacts the life of the Brazilian 
population. In addition to expanding laboratory tests of suspected cases and deaths with a 
higher quality control of performance15, two additional approaches are recommended to 
enable a rapid assessment and better knowledge of the situation of deaths from Covid-19 
in the country’s municipalities:

• Consider as a suspected death of Covid-19 all deaths registered as SARS as from 
March 2020;

• Consider municipalities with probable underreporting of deaths from Covid-19 those 
with a number of deaths due to pneumonia, respiratory failure, septicemia or ill-
defined causes higher than the expected maximum limit for the number of weekly 
occurrences of each cause, based on a control diagram for deaths from these causes. 

These two approaches will allow health municipal departments to conduct investiga-
tions of deaths due to Covid-related causes and, thus, have a better estimation of the real 
number of deaths from the disease. In a study in cooperation with  Universidade Federal de 
Minas Gerais and Vital Strategies, health departments of three municipalities in the coun-
try started, with priority, an investigation process based on these guidelines last March. 
The results of this study should provide the degree of probable underreporting of deaths 
due to Covid-19 with greater precision.

In an epidemic such as Covid-19, reliable and timely cause-of-death data are essential 
to define measures to control the spread of the disease and better manage health services. 
It is estimated that when a single death occurs in one place, hundreds of cases are probably 
present in the population16. Hence, we suggest that the protocols for investigating causes of 
death already found in the  routine of the municipal  health departments include the pro-
posal presented in this article. It is essential that federal, state and municipal governments 
and society have a greater understanding of the risks involved and take the necessary effec-
tive measures to prevent them.
