This article presents the results of the Latin American Observatory of Evaluation 
Indicators (OLIVA, its Spanish acronym) which works to raise the visibility of the scientific 
production indexed in Latin America and the Caribbean, and to enhance its value for 
research assessment. This study deals with the production published in open access by 
journals indexed in SciELO and Redalyc, based on a deduplicated database of a total of 
908,982 documents and 2,591,704 authors. It highlights the magnitude of this production 
and describes its disciplinary diversity, as well as trends in national, regional, and 
international research collaboration. It also examines the publishers of the 1,720 journals 
that make up the database of journals from 15 countries and highlights the predominance 
of universities and public institutions in this regional circuit. The journals that operate 
with the APC model are analyzed, confirming a clearly lower influence of this model 
compared to what is observed in other continents, although Brazil is identified as the 
country with the greatest incidence of this practice in the region. Finally, collaboration 
between states in Brazil, analyzed with SciELO data, proves to be highly significant, 
strongly challenging the traditional interpretation of co-authorship among researchers 
from the same country as academic inbreeding. The study concludes that these journals 
show multi-scalar circulation, a linguistic diversity, and a disciplinary breadth that can 
very effectively serve the current needs of scholarly communication in times of open 
science. 

This research was possible thanks to the financial support received from the Universidad 
Nacional de Cuyo (PROYECTO SIIP TIPO 4-038) and the Agencia I+D+I-Ministerio de 
Ciencia, Tecnología e Innovación, Argentina (PICT 2017-2647). 

The Latin American academic circuit is a constellation of national academic communities 
and regional networks that was formed in the mid-20th century with the support of inter-
governmental organizations, cooperation agencies and foundations that promoted the 
management of scientific information as a key element for development. This led to the 
emergence of regional institutions that collaborated closely in the cataloging and 
construction of bibliographic indexes to foster the dissemination of locally produced 
scientific knowledge (Rodriguez Garcia Coord. 2020). By 1967, a significant step forward 
was made by the building of information centers such as BIREME and research networks 
such as CLACSO. They soon became major regional repositories for the dissemination of 
Latin American scientific production (Packer, 2005; Vessuri, 1994). Efforts to 
professionalize scientific publishing were driven by the creation of indexing systems led 
by regional centers affiliated to United Nations agencies (IMLA-LILACS, DOCPAL, 
REPIDISCA, AGRINTER-SIDALC) and by large public universities, most notably the 
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (responsible for the first indexes Clase, 
Periódica, and afterwards Latindex and BIBLAT). All these systems were created and 
operated by universities, national and inter-governmental organizations to improve the 
bibliographic exchange of the region's scientific and technical production. With the 
pioneering emergence of the regional open access journal platforms SciELO in 1998 and 
Redalyc in 2005, an infrastructure supporting digitized journals and indexing web 
services was born. In addition, and in conjunction with Latindex, these services created a 
journal quality certification system that focuses on peer review and best practices in 
editing. This resulted in a progressive professionalization of the journals, thus 
establishing an editorial hallmark in the region characterized by academic quality and 
non-commercial open access. With a strong public character and the commitment of many 
governments, these portals and indexing services today represent a fundamental space 
for the development of open science (Vessuri, Cetto and Guédon, 2014; Beigel 2019; 
Packer, 2020; Banzato and Salatino, 2020).  

The global report on diamond journals (Bosman et al. 2021) recently published by 
OPERAS shows the importance of journals that do not charge for publishing or for reading, 
and points to the role of Latin America in the production of 25% of the total of these 
publications worldwide. Indeed, these open access journals are mostly published by 
universities and managed by full-time professors, assisted by technical support teams 
centralized in the libraries. An important aspect in the consolidation of university 
publishing in this region is the massive adoption of the open source Open Journal System 
(OJS-PKP) for the management of the editing, peer review and publication of the journals2. 
In addition to university journals, there are also those of the scientific societies and 
professional associations which are often operated with the support of university 
infrastructure and personnel for digitization, creating permalinks, acquiring DOI’s, and 
doing the XML markup of the texts. Although this support needs to be strengthened, this 
core institutional and governmental support explains the existence and growth of Latin 
American and Caribbean journals. 

The vibrancy of this regional circuit is now more visible globally given that the flow of 
scholarly communication has been improved by several mega indexes such as Google 
Scholar, Dimensions, Lens and the federation of repositories LA Referencia which has a 
greater coverage of Latin American and Caribbean production. However, there is still no 
significant impact of these journals on global S&T reports or on evaluations of scientific 
careers, projects and institutions in which the use of the Impact Factor and other 
indicators from traditional databases such as the Web of Science and Scopus continue to 
prevail. This prejudices the value of the journals indexed in the region because it drives 
many research groups to preferentially choose journals managed by the dominant players 
in the publishing industry. This choice has been historically shaped in the academic 
community by the deeply rooted belief of the relevance/transparency of these indicators 
(Martinovich, 2020). It also highlights the gap between the ability of the region to, on the 
one hand, produce and publish quality science and, on the other, to gain international 
legitimacy for its journals (Packer and Meneghini, 2007). Several studies have already 
pointed out the limitations of these traditional indicators which were favored by several 
structural conditions and generated a series of abuses and distortions that affected the 
creativity and even the researchers' concern for the social relevance of science (Guédon, 
2011; Gingras, 2016; Ráfols, 2019). Thus, policies of internationalization that are justified 
by the need to advance in the rankings result in many institutions having their autonomy 
restricted and a weakening of their own capacities to link with the research environment.  

The development of a global consensus on the need for open access to scientific literature 
has brought increasing attention to the region's journals and indexing systems. Basson et. 
al (2021) analyze the proportion of open access articles available in Dimensions, which 
by 2021 had 46.6% of its documents in open access. They note that this percentage 
increases to 63.5% for documents published by Latin American and Caribbean journals. 
There are few studies that provide information, at the document level, on the breadth and 
diversity of the production published in the region, apart from the aforementioned 
mainstream databases. An important precedent is the study by Miguel (2011) which 
compared the coverage of journals from Latin America and the Caribbean included in 
SciELO, Redalyc and SCOPUS for the period 2005-2009. The estimated volume of scientific 
production using these three sources revealed differences with respect to the coverage 
registered in the Latindex catalog3. In relation to disciplinary coverage, SCOPUS and 
SciELO were more thematically balanced, while Redalyc showed a greater inclination 
towards the Social Sciences and Humanities.  

Vuotto, Di Césare and Pallotta (2020) analyzed 17 bibliographic databases and verified 
that currently there are still few of them that openly offer their elements in a common 
format and structure to enable the analysis of production at the document level. For this 
reason, to date, the available empirical studies have only been able to analyze the journal 
collections separately as offered by each of the indexing databases. Scopus has 890 
journals that are published in the region, and Web of Science has 223. As of June 2021, 
SciELO had 1,358 active, indexed journals which are also replicated in the SciELO Citation 
Index in the Web of Science platform, allowing for the evaluation of the performance of 
the articles in a global context of citations. Redalyc, for its part, has its own information 
system and indicators for its collection of 1,415 journals. These two collections have many 
journals in common, as we will see shortly. Then there is also Biblat which has its own 
cataloging system with a large number of complete records at the document level. 
However, at present it is not possible to work with combined data from these three 
indexing databases in the region because they are not interoperable. To these sources LA 
Referencia should be added. It is a very relevant database which harvests the production 
of 790 institutions from 12 Ibero-American countries. It currently has more than three 
million documents. However, it does not have advanced searching by journal, and there 
are overlaps of data with the former indexing services given that it originates from the 
repositories of the individual institutions.  

Furthermore, there are thousands of journals that do not have metadata at the document 
level. This affects the possibility of analyzing the production published in Latindex 
journals which continues to be, as Miguel already observed in 2011, the cataloging 
database with the greatest coverage. In addition, there is no standardization of 
institutional affiliations, nor of the disciplinary classification of journals; nor is the use of 
unique identifiers of authors and institutions such as ORCID and ROR sufficiently 
widespread among the different databases.  All these further limit studies at the document 
level. Consequently, this large corpus of documents published in the region is observed 
from fragmented approaches. 

It is in this context that the OLIVA project (Latin American Observatory of eVAluation 
Indicators4) emerged as an initiative of the Centro de Estudios de la Circulación del 
Conocimiento (CECIC-Facultad de Ciencias Políticas y Sociales), which was approved and 
funded in early 2019 by the Universidad Nacional de Cuyo. The main purpose of this 
project is to give visibility to the richness of this scientific production published in the 
region, and to develop indicators to recognize the value of these journals for the 
assessment of individual careers and academic institutions. For the first phase of the 
project, the SciELO/FAPESP Program of Brazil, Redalyc (at the Universidad Autónoma del 
Estado de México -UAEM Mexico), and the Consejo Latinoamericano de Ciencias Sociales 
(CLACSO) were invited to collaborate. The results of this first phase of the project are 
presented in this paper. The second phase foresees the incorporation of documents from 
journals indexed in Latindex Catalog 2.0 and in Biblat. A pilot is already underway with 
these institutions.  

A database of 1,720 scientific journals published in Latin America and the Caribbean and 
indexed in SciELO and/or Redalyc was built within the framework of OLIVA. The study 
was organized on two levels - one at the journal level, and the other at the document level. 
The objective was to map out this circuit of quality scientific literature, addressing the 
existing forms of co-authorship, disciplinary characteristics, and languages of publication.  
In the first part of this article, we delve on the description of the journals in the database 
constructed at this stage (SciELO and Redalyc). We then pass on to characterizing the 
publishing institutions of the journals and highlight their predominantly public nature 
and self-management by the academic community. An empirical classification of the 
journals’ disciplines was carried out based on the information found on their respective 
web sites. This was done because of the existing limitations of classifying the documents 
based on the disciplinary cataloging offered by the indexing databases. It revealed that 
the production has broad coverage, with half of the indexed documents being from the 
Social Sciences and Humanities, and the other half from Engineering, Natural Sciences, 
and Health and Biological Sciences. We then analyzed the patterns of co-authorship and 
the different levels of collaboration – global, regional (LA) and national. We also analyzed 
the language patterns of the corpus, noting the growth of journals that publish in English 
and a multilingualism that is emerging in journals that are beginning to publish in several 
languages.  

Finally, we focus on the case of Brazil. Given the significant weight of this country with 
50% of the total number of articles published in the database and having a high tendency 
towards co-authorship among Brazilian authors, we contrast this  with a more detailed 
analysis of the SciELO Brazil collection (only journals from Brazil). There we find that 
there is a strong tendency towards scientific collaboration between authors affiliated with 
the same country but belonging to universities from different states. A picture thus 
emerges that calls into question the preconception that collaboration between authors of 
the same country signifies academic inbreeding and reveals the complexity of this 
national academic space and its current dynamics.  

The OLIVA project database is made up of the collected data of the journals indexed by SciELO and Redalyc, 
and revised data from the published documents. Each of these indexing systems collaborated by providing 
its historical database updated to June 2019. The data was subjected to data cleaning and deduplication of 
the journals in common. The result was an integrated bibliographic database for statistical purposes and is 
composed of the following elements at the document level: type of document, date of publication, language, 
and author’s country. It does not include data on citations as this is outside the scope of the project.  

The construction of this integrated database faced significant limitations. The principal one was, as has 
already been pointed out, the lack of a common identification system amongst the indexing platforms for 
authors, journals and institutional affiliations.  There was no information on gender, as is usually the case 
with scientific documents and bibliographic records. An important difficulty was compiling the diverse 
portions of the indexed published documents in the journals pertaining to both indexing services.  

In view of all this, we opted for a process of revision of the journals through a manual and meticulous 
procedure. First, the journals only in SciELO or only in Redalyc were identified, and the metadata of these 
documents were aggregated including articles, reviews, and editorials - both from active journals at the time 
of capture as well as documents indexed at an earlier time in between the gaps. in coverage. As for the 
journals common to both indexing platforms, the same journal could have different gaps or periods of 
coverage in each of the platforms. Thus, the consistency and completeness of the data were compared and, 
for each case, it was decided to keep those that had the widest temporal coverage and the largest number 
of documents. It should be clarified that in this phase of the project, we worked only with journals published 
in Latin America and the Caribbean5.  

Regarding the disciplinary classification of journals, we faced the challenge of the different classifications 
used by the indexing databases, even for the grouping into scientific areas. Thus, the same journal could be 
classified in different disciplines and, as a result, in different areas. For the OLIVA database, we used a 
classification based on the OECD and Frascati Manual criteria. The assignment of one or more disciplines to 
each journal was made through an empirical survey, based on the description that each journal provides in 
the "Scope" or "About" section of its official website. Then the journals were grouped into eight subject 
areas: 1) Agricultural Sciences; 2) Social Sciences; 3) Humanities; 4) Engineering and Technology; 5) 
Medical and Health; 6) Natural and Exact; 7) Multidisciplinary; and 8) Multidisciplinary-Social Sciences & 
Humanities (SSH). The existence of two areas called "Multidisciplinary" is due to the fact that in the OLIVA 
database there are a significant number of journals with a high degree of diversification and extent in their 
scope, crossing broader disciplinary boundaries. Thus, in group 7 we included journals that belong to at 
least two subject areas combining “hard” sciences with SSH. In group 8, we included journals that combine 
subject areas only within the Social Sciences and Humanities. This primary classification allowed us to 
reduce inconsistencies and to more accurately assess the disciplinary distribution of the journals analyzed. 

Information on the publishers of each journal as well as the APC information was also taken from each 
journal’s website. 

The OLIVA database, constructed from the collections of Redalyc and SciELO contains 
908,982 records of documents from 1,720 journals published between 1909 and May 
2019 (see Table 1). The main type of document is the article, representing 87% of the 
records, although this percentage varies amongst the subject areas. There is an average 
of 3.1 authors per document and 3.3 per article. Given that multiple authorship is a more 
widespread practice in the Exact and Natural Sciences, Engineering and Biological 
Sciences, this data is already indicating that we are dealing with a production that has a 
broad disciplinary profile.  One might think that the journals published in the region 
publish only in the vernacular languages and therefore would be mostly from SSH since 
they are accustomed to publishing in local languages. But we will see later that this is a 
multilingual corpus.  

The journals edited in Brazil represent 29.4% of the total and account for 48.9% of the 
total number of documents and 50.1% of the articles. This predominance of Brazilian 
production is reflected even more prominently in the number of authors, given the 
growing trend in that country towards collaboration among 3 or more researchers, 
including in the social sciences and humanities. In terms of number of articles, next after 
the journals from Brazil are those from Mexico, Colombia, Chile, Cuba and Argentina. The 
journals from the rest of the region represent only 8.7% of the articles. 

Concerning the temporal coverage of the available data, the corpus reveals more than a 
century of indexed Latin American scientific production. The oldest document dates back 
to 1909 and the most recent one to May 2019. However, 84.2% of the articles fall within 
the period 2005- 2018. There are much fewer documents in 2019 (0.67% of the articles) 
due to the fact that the data collection took place between May and June of that year, thus 
representing only a partial year. The earliest documents are from the Memórias do 
Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, which has 582 records between 1909 and 1939. Then we find the 
first documents of the Revista Chilena de Pediatría appearing in 1940, Bragantia in 1941, 
Arquivos de Neuro-Psiquiatria in 1943 and Anais da Escola Superior de Agricultura Luiz de 
Queiroz, today named Scientia Agricola, in 1944. The first appearances of journal 
documents from the other countries are in 1969 (Colombia), 1974 (Mexico), 1993 
(Argentina and Cuba), 1995 (Costa Rica and Peru), 1984 - Revista de la Facultad de 
Medicina (Venezuela), 2000 (Ecuador, Puerto Rico, Dominican Republic and Uruguay), 
2001 (Bolivia) and 2005 (Panama). The first journal in Social Sciences and Humanities 
with a record in the database is the Revista de Administração de Empresas (1961) followed 
by the Revista Latinoamericana de Psicología (1969).  

Up to 1942 there are less than 100 documents per year; up to 1990, less than 1,000; and 
up to 1999, less than 10,000. The highest number is reached in 2015, with 58,025 articles. 
These values should be interpreted with caution because they are not necessarily 
representative of the history of journals in Latin America and the Caribbean. Indeed, we 
were able to verify that, in most of the older journals, the digitization and availability of 
the volumes prior to 1998 is patchy. There is only information for 78 journals and it 
corresponds to documents published before 1998 - the year SciELO was launched - so that 
the inclusion of documents prior to the year of the indexing of a journal by that time seems 
exceptional. 

The most notable growth in the number of journals and articles occurred with the 
launching of Redalyc in 2005 which began to index journals especially in the Social 
Sciences. As seen in Figure 1, the peak is reached in 2015 which shows a sharp increase 
relative to some flattening of the article curve beginning in 2011. The number of articles 
and journals per year decreases in 2018 because there is a delay between publishing and 
incorporation of the new issues into the Redalyc and SciELO databases. This delay varies 
widely from one publisher to the next and among countries, and is due to a multitude of 
reasons such as delays in publication or in the management of the databases, difficulties 
in XML-JATS markup, or differing priorities which the publishing institutions place on the 
inclusion of new issues in each database. 

Accordingly, the evolution of the journals shows two significant increases, one in 1998-
2000 and another in 2005, the years when SciELO and Redalyc were launched. The 
journals published in Brazil make a significant contribution because there is a jump in the 
number of journals precisely in 1998. The curve continues its upward trend, reaching 198 
journals in 2004 and 324 in 2005. The curves of the other six countries with significant 
publishing activity also show a similar trend, although less pronounced than that of Brazil 
(Figure 2). The first big increase occurs two years later, between 1999 and 2000 when 
SciELO began to more actively promote itself outside of its country of origin (Brazil). For 
example, for Mexico there are 23 journals in 1996 and 87 in 2000. The most pronounced 
increase appears to be for the journals edited in Colombia when, in the same period, the 
number of journals goes from 4 to 35.  

The impact of the appearance of Redalyc in 2005 can be noted for all countries, especially 
for Mexico and Colombia. The latter showed a very sustained growth in the number of 
journals in the following decade, eventually surpassing Mexico which experienced a slight 
stagnation in the number of journals. Argentina, Venezuela, and Cuba follow a similar 
pattern with two sudden expansions.  However, the increase in subsequent years is 
moderate compared to the other cases. More specifically, for journals published in Cuba, 
there is an upward trend between 2005 and 2015, followed by a decline. A decrease in the 
number of journals indexed in Venezuela can be observed beginning in 2009 and, more 
rapidly, since 2014. Finally, the case of Chile is also distinct with a sustained tendency, 
where 2005 did not imply a sudden change in the growth trend of the journals. 

Let us now take a closer look at the disciplinary features of the journals that make up the 
OLIVA database. Journals from the Social Sciences represent 33% of the total, Medical and 
Health Sciences 19%, Humanities 12% and Natural and Exact Sciences 10%.  However, if 
we look at the disciplinary distribution by country of publication, we see that journals in 
the Social Sciences are predominant in Uruguay, Ecuador, Puerto Rico, Brazil, Bolivia, 
Mexico and Peru (see Figure 3). Medical and Health Sciences journals have an important 
share in Cuba, Uruguay, Bolivia, Costa Rica and Peru. Journals in the Natural and Exact 
Sciences have their greatest relative presence in Argentina, Bolivia and Brazil. Figure 3 
shows the disciplinary areas of the journals and allows for comparing their distribution 
in less visible countries such as those in Central America and the Caribbean with the large 
players in the region. 

The comparison by country is very interesting but it is also relevant to observe 
publication asymmetries within the countries. Scientific production is often centralized 
and concentrated in the principal cities, in particular, in the biggest institutions of higher 
education. For this reason, we are interested here in surveying which institutions serve 
as the main journal publishers in Latin America and the Caribbean.  

Among the 1,720 journals in the OLIVA database, we found 899 different publishers which 
shows the diversity of the Latin American circuit. However, it is worth pointing out the 
institutions that publish a great number of the journals: 38% of the total are published by 
only 53 mega universities, while the remaining 62% are published by 846 institutions. 
Table 2 shows the institutions that publish the largest number of journals.  

As can be seen, the majority of journals in the survey are published by universities. The 
large public universities such as the Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, 
Universidade de São Paulo, Universidad de Costa Rica, Universidad de Chile and the 
Universidad de Buenos Aires carry considerable weight. An exceptional case is that of 
Colombia, where publishing is concentrated in 5 institutions: Universidad de los Andes, 
Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Universidad de Antioquia, Pontificia Universidad 
Javeriana and Universidad del Valle. Another exceptional case is Cuba, where the Editorial 
de Ciencias Médicas (ECIMED) is the third largest institutional publisher in terms of 
number of journals within the OLIVA database6. 

Let us now look at the distribution of the publishing institutions according to their 
editorial management and financing models. We found five types of publishers in SciELO 
and Redalyc journals: 1) universities; 2) scientific societies, professional associations, 
independent research centers, national academies, and professional councils; 3) 
governmental agencies (ministry departments, museums, and publicly managed 
hospitals); 4) commercial publishers (here we bring together small and medium size 
national and local specialized publishers), and finally; 5) the big publishers. The latter 
refers to Reed-Elsevier, Wiley-Blackwell, Springer and Taylor & Francis, considered as 
oligopolistic commercial publishers since they concentrated between 50% and 70% of 
the world’s scientific production up to 2013 (Lariviére, Haustein y Mongeon 2015).  

As can be seen in Figure 4, 66% of the journals are edited by universities, close to 7% by 
governmental agencies, while scientific societies and independent research centers 
account for 20% of the publishers. This shows a strong preference for academic and 
public management. We also identified and classified the commercial publishers’ share: 
local or national commercial publishers (6%), and major commercial publishers (2.5%). 
Journals in medicine and health predominate within the local commercial publishers. 
Here is where the share by ECIMED is noteworthy.  

Most of the journals managed by the major commercial publishers are edited in Brazil 
(29), 7 in Chile, 3 in Colombia, 2 in Mexico, and 1 in Argentina. Described by discipline, 
this group (43) includes 20 journals that belong to Medical and Health Sciences, 14 to 
Exact and Natural Sciences, 5 to Engineering, 1 to Agricultural Sciences, and 3 to Social 
Sciences and Humanities. Forty-six percent of these journals are published entirely in 
English, and 88% of them belong to scientific societies that have outsourced their editorial 
management.  

A key element in the current discussions of scholarly publishing refers to the change in 
the business model from charging for subscriptions to charging fees to authors for 
publishing their papers (Article Processing Charges, APC). We gathered the publication 
fee information from the websites of each of the journals. In most cases, the journals did 
not report publication fees. Upon further analysis, we verified that the absence of this 
information was due to the fact that they were indeed open access diamond journals, i.e. 
they do not charge authors for publishing or readers for accessing the contents. In our 
universe of 1,720 journals, we observed that 10% of the journals charge APC’s, the 
majority being published in Brazil (60% of the total 182 journals with APC). This is 
different from what was observed by Appel and Albagli (2019) in considering a larger 
universe of journals edited in Brazil, where the incidence of APC was still very low. In the 
OLIVA database, Brazil appears as leading the growth of this APC business model. To a 
lesser extent, in descending order, are the journals edited in Mexico, Chile, Argentina, 
Colombia, Peru and Venezuela.  

Amongst the journals with APC’s, 38% of them are managed by scientific societies, 37% 
by universities, 13% by the major commercial publishers, 7% by a governmental 
organization, and 5% by small commercial publishers. The fact that many journals 
managed by the academic community have sought to finance their operations through the 
adoption of APC’s brings us to the question of the sustainability of the journals and their 
varying degrees of institutionalization. Córdoba González (2021) observes that Latin 
American journals with APC’s have, by and large, low fees. This is also noticed in the 
journals included in the OLIVA database, which suggests that they are responding to the 
need to cover the costs of editorial processes and the management of the peer review 
process that are not funded by the institutions. The journals indexed in SciELO and 
Redalyc have specific cataloging, evaluation and digitization procedures which require 
material and human resources. These are generally provided by the publishing 
institutions, but in some cases they turn to the APC to pay for the DOI, translations, or 
administrative or technical support. This cannot, however, be equated to the business 
model of the commercial journals. Furthermore, journals with high APC’s, similar to the 
levels found in the mainstream industry, are exceptional in the region.  

The sustainability of diamond access journals is a contested issue. The recently published 
OPERAS report highlights the importance of this model and it estimates the existence of 
29,000 diamond access journals worldwide. It also points out their largely weak 
management as a generalized feature of these journals and suggests the adoption of a new 
business model (Bosman et al. 2021). The journals in SciELO and Redalyc that we have 
been describing – the vast majority of which do not charge for reading or publishing – 
demonstrate just the opposite: that they are not merely volunteer enterprises. In Latin 
America there is considerable consensus about the need for national and institutional 
policies to sustain the management and regularity of the journals, but also a strong 
consensus that the solution does not lie in the adoption of the APC model (Babini and 
Debat, 2020). There is also a legitimate concern that the APC opens a floodgate to 
predatory journals and commercialization (Córdoba González, 2021). 

Collaboration is an interesting and complex phenomenon in the production published in 
the journals included in OLIVA. First, it should be noted that only 25.8% of the articles are 
authored by a single author. This varies considerably among the journals of the different 
disciplinary areas (see Table 3). It represents 77.2% of the articles in the Humanities and 
49.3% in the Social Sciences. In the Humanities, only 19% of articles are authored by two 
or three authors, and there are very few articles with more than three authors (3.8%). On 
the other hand, 40.8% of the articles in the Social Sciences have two or three authors, and 
10% with four to eight. Table 3 shows that Multidisciplinary SSH journals have an 
intermediate percentage of authors compared to the two separate areas. 

These trends within the social sciences undergo some variations if the analysis is 
segmented by the country of publication of the journals. Journals edited in Brazil, Cuba 
and Puerto Rico have, on average, 38.6% of their articles with only one author, a value 
significantly lower than that of the area as a whole. At the other end of the scale, the 
journals in the Social Sciences of Bolivia and Ecuador are largely dominated by single 
authorship (76.8% and 77.4%, respectively). The incidence of single authorship for 
journals edited in the remaining nine countries (Panama does not have any) ranges from 
53.8% for Colombia to 62.4% for Mexico of articles with one author. Among the journals 
in the Humanities, differences can also be noted but to a lesser extent. In Cuba, 64.2% of 
articles in journals in the Humanities have only one author. In Brazil, the percentage is 
70%, which is not far from 70.1% in Uruguay or 73.6% in Chile, for example. In Argentina 
it is more than 80%, while Mexico reaches 87.6% and Costa Rica 89.2%.  

In general terms, the articles in the journals in the Agricultural Sciences, Medical and 
Health Sciences, and Multidisciplinary have mainly 4-8 authors. Articles with two or three 
authors are found primarily in journals in the Exact and Natural Sciences, and in 
Engineering and Technology. In Multidisciplinary, they represent approximately 40%. 

Some countries stand out because their journals follow a different trend. In Brazil, in the 
Medical and Health Sciences journals, articles with only one author account for 5% of the 
articles, while those with 4-8 authors represent 61.8% of the total. In all other areas, the 
journals of Brazil show the same tendency of having articles with a greater number of 
authors. Another interesting case is Colombia, with a pronounced concentration of 
articles with two or three authors (instead of 4-8 authors as the rest). In Agricultural 
Sciences it totals 56.3% of the articles, in Medical and Health Sciences 41.7%, in Natural 
and Exact Sciences 59.9% and in Engineering and Technology 63.8%. All these data for 
Colombian journals show notably higher percentages than the aggregate of the rest of the 
countries in Table 3. 

The degree of international collaboration can be observed through co-authorship. Figure 
6 shows, for six countries, the proportion of articles authored by a single author from the 
country in question, by several co-authors from that same country, and by co-authors 
from that same country with co-authors from other countries. It is interesting to compare 
the cases of Argentinian and Brazilian authors. A very high proportion, 42%, of articles 
authored by Argentinians are authored by a single person, a phenomenon related to the 
disciplinary dominance of SSH papers. The rest are split between those corresponding 
only to Argentine authors (48.3%) and those with some type of international 
collaboration (9.8%). On the other hand, articles with only one Brazilian author are 
relatively few (14.1%). Here, collaboration amongst researchers affiliated to Brazil 
dominates (79.6%) and is distributed throughout the geography of the largest country in 
South America (see next section). It is interesting to note that international collaboration 
is a very limited practice for Brazilian authors when they publish in journals edited in 
Brazil. The focus on national collaboration is hence combined with a lower propensity for 
single authorship, as already mentioned.  

It is interesting to compare these forms of collaboration that we have been observing in 
OLIVA with other databases where international collaboration of authors from these 
countries is much higher, and trending upwards. According to data from SCOPUS, 23.9% 
of articles authored by at least one author of Brazil in 2011 showed some form of 
international collaboration. This increased to 29.6% in 2015, and in 2020 reached 36.1%. 
In the case of Argentina, the values for the same years are 40.4%, 42.8% and 49.9%, 
respectively7. However, it is worth remembering that Brazil’s share is significantly higher 
than that of the rest of the countries in the region (according to Scopus, articles by authors 
of Brazil represent 48% of the documents produced in Latin America in the period 1996-
2020). 

It seems likely that the degree of international collaboration by Brazilian researchers in 
these mainstream journals is affected by this country’s linguistic isolation within Latin 
America and its growing tendency to publish in English, as well as its internationalization 
policies prioritizing the North America and Europe.  Meanwhile, for Spanish-speaking 
Latin American authors, there is a more sustained tradition of intra-regional 
collaboration. Based on the OLIVA corpus, it can be said that Brazilian authors collaborate 
more with each other, while Argentines, Mexicans and Chileans work more regularly with 
colleagues from other countries in the region. However, it is important to mention that 
authors from Brazil represent an important proportion as co-authors of their colleagues 
in journals edited in other countries. For example, of the segment of articles with authors 
from Argentina with international collaboration (n=3,906), there is also at least one 
author from Brazil in 26.5% of the cases. In collaborative papers with authors from Chile 
(n=5,376), co-authorship with Brazil is found in 19% of the articles. In the case of 
Colombia (n=6,729) co-authorship with Brazil reaches 16.6% of the articles. Clearly, 
national collaboration for Brazilians appears dominant when analyzed for the journals 
edited in Brazil, yet they have a significant participation in the co-authorship of articles 
published in other countries. We will further explore the mapping of international 
collaboration in the OLIVA database in subsequent studies, especially to determine the 
balance between intra-regional and extra-regional collaboration, by discipline and by 
country. It will be worth exploring deeper whether authors from Brazil tend to collaborate 
with colleagues from outside the region to a greater extent than with authors from 
Spanish-speaking countries depending on the recognition of the journal. 

In the case of authors from Chile, it is worth noting some nuances in the general trends in 
the OLIVA database. The proportions of articles with individual authorship or with 
international collaboration are more than double than those of the journals of Brazil, with 
a lower incidence of collaboration within the country itself. Co-authorship with colleagues 
located in other countries is the highest of all, a feature which, as explained below, may be 
indicative of an academic culture with peculiarities within the region. Among the 
remaining cases, Cuba presents similarities with Brazil although with a greater degree of 
international collaboration. On the other hand, Colombia and Mexico are similar to Chile, 
although with a greater proportion of national collaboration.  

Along similar lines, trends analogous to those mentioned above can be analyzed by 
observing articles  by authors of different countries and the country of the journal (see 
Figure 7).  The first thing that emerges from this analysis is that, for the countries in 
question, articles are published above all in journals of the same countries as the authors. 
This feature is particularly pronounced in the case of authors from Brazil: 93.7% of the 
articles which they author are published in journals of Brazil. Chile comes second, yet it 
represents only 1.6% of the total of articles. In bibliometric studies based on the 
mainstream indexing sources, this characteristic is generally interpreted as academic 
inbreeding, thus frequently resulting in a negative assessment. In the following section 
we propose an alternative approach which contrasts with simply attributing this national 
collaboration to practices of academic inbreeding. It is based on a detailed study of the 
relevant number of articles authored by Brazilians and published in Brazil. 

The case of the authors from Chile, 75% of whom have published in journals of their own 
country, is certainly a high value but lower than other cases. Journals from Colombia, 
Brazil and Mexico are important recipients of Chilean authors' submissions within the 
region. This type of distribution may be linked to greater pressure from the assessment 
culture of Chilean institutions which discourages publishing in the nationally edited 
journals and provides direct incentives for international collaboration, as was already 
mentioned in the discussion of Figure 3. On the other hand, authors from Colombia, Cuba 
and Mexico tend to make their submissions to their nationally edited journals, although 
not at the same degree as described for Brazil. 

Argentina also has its own peculiarities. The fact that it has the lowest share (56.4%) of 
articles published in its journals with at least one author from Argentina suggests a 
stronger trend to publish abroad than that observed for the Chilean case. However, there 
are other explanations. There is evidence that journals from Argentina are 
underrepresented in the OLIVA database, a product of a traditional selection of social 
science and humanities journals edited in that country by the services of the Latindex 
catalog. This selection was driven, among other factors, by the characteristics of the 
existing assessment culture at CONICET (the National Science Council) and the national 
universities where publications indexed in Latindex are rewarded at the same level as 
those included in SciELO, Scopus and WoS (Beigel, 2014).  To this we can add the lower 
technical complexity of indexing in the Latindex Catalog 2.0 compared to the 
requirements of SciELO and Redalyc, and the clout of the national (Argentine) node of 
Latindex. If we compare the journals of Brazil, Argentina, Chile, Mexico and Colombia in 
the Latindex Catalog 2.0 with the OLIVA database, we see that in the case of Chile there 
are 144 journals in OLIVA and 167 in the Latindex Catalog 2.0. In contrast, there are 316 
Argentine journals in the Latindex Catalog 2.0 and 167 in SciELO or Redalyc, that is, almost 
twice as many. In contrast, the journals of Argentina in the OLIVA database that do not 
belong to the social sciences and humanities are mostly indexed in SciELO (43/69).  

Let’s move on now to language trends. In contrast to the highly predominant role of 
English widely seen in mainstream databases, the OLIVA corpus is characterized by a 
remarkable linguistic diversity, driven by the infrastructure developed in the region with 
multilingual indexing and publishing protocols and infrastructures. Table 4 shows the 
central role of Spanish and Portuguese, but also a significant presence of English which 
represents 23.9% of the articles. French has a very limited presence, as do other 
languages, some of which appear only once. Portuguese, logically, is found mainly in 
journals published in Brazil. It is interesting to note that 62.4% of the articles in journals 
of Brazil  were published in Portuguese, while English represents one-third (34.6%). This 
value is only comparable to the percentage of English in articles in journals of Puerto Rico 
(50.5%), Chile (23.7%) and Mexico (17.1%). In the case of Chile, it might be one more 
element pointing to an academic culture more influenced by mainstream standards. In the 
case of Mexico and Puerto Rico, it may be influenced by traditional academic ties. 

Outside of the journals of Brazil, Mexico, Puerto Rico and Chile, an average of 5.4% of the 
articles are in English. On the other hand, Portuguese as a language of publication outside 
of the journals of Brazil journals is very low, reaching 5.4% of the articles in the journals 
of Costa Rica, 3.8% in journals edited in Uruguay, and 2.5% in Ecuador. Conversely, in the 
Spanish-speaking area, Spanish is by far the predominant language. In journal articles 
from Bolivia, Cuba, Ecuador, Peru, Dominican Republic, Uruguay and Venezuela, Spanish 
accounts for more than 90%. 

For articles in journals edited in Brazil (n=396,293), Portuguese has the highest 
percentage in the Social Sciences and in Multidisciplinary-SS&H (85%). Articles in English 
are the majority in two disciplinary areas, namely Engineering and Technology (65.1%) 
and Natural and Exact Sciences (54.5%). The percentages are also high for Medical and 
Health Sciences (44.4%) and Multidisciplinary (42.4%). Spanish has a stronger presence 
than Portuguese in the journals of the group of Spanish-speaking countries. Consequently, 
8.4% of the articles in the Multidisciplinary-SSH journals and 7.9% of those in the 
Humanities are published in Spanish. 

In journals from countries where Spanish is the official language, the share of English 
among articles in journals of the Natural and Exact Sciences is 41.9% and for Engineering 
and Technology, 28.4%. Portuguese is very much in the minority, and only in the Social 
Sciences does it reach 2.9%. Spanish, on the other hand, is dominant in the Medical and 
Health Sciences and in the three categories of Social Sciences and Humanities (more than 
91%). 

Publication in English is associated with a greater number of authors. The average 
number of authors in the English-language articles is 4.3. For Portuguese it is 3.3 and for 
Spanish, 2.7 authors per article. The relatively high number for Brazil is also linked with 
the tendency of authors and journals of Brazil to publish articles with two or more 
authors. The same decreasing order (English, Portuguese, and Spanish) in the average 
number of authors is observed in all areas. 

There is also a relation between the authors’ country affiliation and publication in English. 
The articles authored only by researchers from outside Latin America and the Caribbean 
(8.5% of 643,929 articles with country of affiliation identified) represent 16.9% of the 
articles in English. Similarly, those in collaboration with at least one author from the 
region and one from outside the region account for 4.7% of the articles. In both types of 
authorship, English is the main language of publication, both for articles with 
collaboration outside the region (49.9% of 30,307 articles) and for those without regional 
collaboration (52.4% of 54,700 articles).   

The evolution over time of the distribution of languages of publication can also be 
analyzed. In the last decade, English has increased its relative share at the expense of 
Portuguese, while Spanish has remained approximately constant (see Figure 8). A 
disaggregated examination of the two predominant linguistic contexts - Portuguese and 
Spanish -  reveals some trends that are worth highlighting. In the case of journals from 
Brazil, the share of articles in English went from representing 24% in 2009 to 58% in 
2018. The decrease in the relative weight of articles in Portuguese over this period was of 
the same magnitude, while Spanish remained at a modest 3%. This trend of English is 
repeated in all disciplinary areas, but very attenuated in the Social Sciences and 
Humanities, while it is strongly endorsed by the Agricultural Sciences, Medical and Health 
Sciences, Engineering and Technology, and Exact and Natural Sciences. The 
predominance of English was already noticeable at the beginning of the period as 
represented in the journals of the latter disciplinary area.  

In the other countries, although the evolution over these ten years could also be 
characterized by a decrease in the relative weight of Spanish in favor of English, the latter 
never overtook the former. There is also an important segmentation by discipline. In the 
journals in Agricultural Sciences, Engineering and Technologies and Natural and Exact 
Sciences considered as a whole, English went from representing 29% of the articles in 
2009 to 42% in 2018. At the same time, Spanish dropped from 70% to 57% of the articles. 
In other words, the official language of most Latin American countries remained the 
predominant language of the articles. 

The other disciplinary areas, on the other hand, also show similar behavior. Overall, 
articles in Spanish in these journals went from 92.8% at the beginning of the selected 
period to 86.6% at the end of the period. In contrast, not only did the number of articles 
in English increase (5.6% to 10.2%) but also those in Portuguese (1.2% to 3%). This trend 
was slightly more marked in the cases of journals from Uruguay and Colombia. 

As previously mentioned, the weight of Brazil is central to the analysis of the scientific 
journal space in Latin America. space.  Journals of Brazil account for 29.4% of the 1,720 
journals included in the OLIVA corpus. Looking at the journals by discipline, most are 
found in the Medical and Health Sciences (34.3% of the total) and the Natural and Exact 
Sciences (33%). On the other hand, there are fewer among the Humanities (23.9%), 
Engineering and Technology (19.3%) and Multidisciplinary-SSH (17.9%). However, 
Brazil's weight is best measured by analyzing the number of articles in its journals. 
Overall, 50.1% of the articles in the OLIVA database have been published in journals of 
Brazil. By discipline, this percentage is even higher for journals in the Agricultural 
Sciences (65.8%), Multidisciplinary (58.8%), Medical and Health Sciences (54.5%), and 
Natural and Exact Sciences (53.9%). 

In this last section, a complementary data source is analyzed for an in-depth 
characterization of the national collaboration in this country. This is the metadata of 
articles published in the journals of the SciELO Brazil collection over the five-year period 
2016-2020, totaling 104,750 documents. This information was extracted from SciELO in 
May 2021. This is the portion of the database that has undergone the process of 
standardizing the names of authors and their institutional affiliations, and allows for a 
more precise analysis. This set of documents includes authors from 162 countries. In 
74.5% of the cases, there are only authors affiliated with Brazilian institutions (and 23.6% 
with only one author), while in 18.3% of the cases there are only authors from other 
countries. In just 7.1% of the documents is there collaboration between authors inside 
and outside of Brazil. The picture is therefore very similar to the one presented in Figure 
6. Notably, in these articles co-authored by Brazilians and foreigners, only 17% are co-
authored with Latin American countries. This phenomenon, to a large extent determined 
by linguistic aspects, is something that we have already commented on. 

However, looking in detail at the authors from Brazil, a heterogeneous picture emerges. 
There are articles by researchers from all 27 Brazilian states, but strongly concentrated 
in only some of them. In the set of documents that have at least one author from Brazil 
with his/her geographic state declared (n=85.528), 85.7% belong to five states. These are 
the states of São Paulo (33,4%), Minas Gerais (15,4%), Rio de Janeiro (13,7%), Rio Grande 
do Sul (13,1%) and Paraná (10,1%), in other words, states in the Southeast and the South 
of Brazil. 

Of this segment of 58,148 documents, 63% are coauthored, and among these one can see 
some trends in within-country collaboration that opens up an interpretation beyond the 
dualistic terms of academic inbreeding/cross-breeding. In effect, 59% of the documents 
are by authors from the same state; however 31.9% involve collaboration between 
authors from institutions in two different states. There is even 9.1% involving authors 
from three or more states (the maximum is 26 different states). This is an extremely 
complex and heterogeneous country, with a large number of university and scientific 
institutions, making it difficult to characterize a collaboration between two Brazilian 
authors (or publication in a journal of their country) as a practice of academic inbreeding. 
Collaboration between authors from different institutions within the same state can be 
thought of in the same vein. 

In the absence of data that could illustrate inter-institutional collaboration, the analysis 
of inter-state collaboration in the case of Brazil introduces a significant nuance in the 
interpretation of the forms of collaboration that appear in Figure 6. There we mention 
that 79.6% of the articles in the OLIVA database with authors from Brazil are only by 
authors from Brazil, and that other countries show lower percentages of publication with 
authors only from within their own country, such as Argentina (48.3%), Chile (52.7%) 
and Mexico (56.5%). The documents that we analyze in this section (SciELO 2016-2020) 
show that, when there is participation of authors from Brazil, in 41% of the cases there is 
collaboration, either by authors from two states (31.9%) or from three or more states 
(9.1%). The remaining 59% (only within-state collaboration) is presented as a proportion 
similar to that of exclusively within-country collaboration in the Spanish-speaking 
countries mentioned. 

In effect, collaboration is one of the fundamental factors in the remarkable growth of 
Brazilian authors' publications in recent decades. In this regard, Sidone, Haddad, & Mena-
Chalco (2016) showed the central role of institutions in the Southeastern states in intra- 
and inter-regional collaborations within Brazil. Although such states continue to have this 
central role - particularly São Paulo - in recent years collaboration between other states 
in the same or different regions has increased, a phenomenon that is particularly strong 
in the Northeast and the South. 

If one were to look at the research system of the magnitude of Brazil at its highest level of 
aggregation, one would lose the detail necessary to analyze the complexity of the 
interactions inside its boundaries. Table 5 shows co-authorship by the number of 
different authors’ states according to the disciplinary area of the journals (SciELO 
classification is used). Clearly, journals in disciplinary areas that tend to have a greater 
number of authors in their articles and documents present a greater degree of inter-state 
collaboration. Even the participation of authors from three or more states exceeds 10% 
in the Agricultural Sciences, Exact and Natural Sciences, Biological Sciences and 
Multidisciplinary journals. The degree of co-authorship in the three areas related to the 
Social Sciences and Humanities is lower, but in no case does the number of documents 
with co-authorship between two or more Brazilian states fall below 29%.  A significant 
portion of collaboration among authors is no longer between institutions, but instead 
between different states.  

Nonetheless, there are clearly important asymmetries in the different variants of 
collaboration between authors from different states. For authors of documents from a 
given state, the other top five states with which there is co-authorship are analyzed, São 
Paulo appears as a prominent "partner" in 26 cases, Minas Gerais in 25, Rio de Janeiro in 
21, Rio Grande do Sul in 14 and Paraná in 12. Then Pernambuco comes in with 7 and 
Brasilia with 5. There are seven states which do not rank among the top five collaborative 
states for any other state. 

Let us consider in detail,  the case of authors affiliated with institutions in the Northeast 
region. Table 6 shows the nine states of the region, and the types of collaboration of 
authors from each of the states with authors from the same or other states and regions in 
Brazil. First of all, there is a considerable tendency (just over 40%) to collaborate with 
other authors from the same state. However, the collaboration amongst the states of the 
region and the five most productive states (states with the most documents) as mentioned 
previously - São Paulo, Minas Gerais, Rio de Janeiro, Rio Grande do Sul and Paraná - is split 
approximately equally. The total co-authorship with authors in the remaining thirteen 
states ranges between 7.7% and 12.7%. In other words, the collaboration “outside state 
borders”/between states takes place with the same degree of intensity between states in 
the same region as it does between these same states and the five major centers of 
scientific production. Of course, this trend is complemented by the modest role of the 
other states in within-state collaboration.  

Another point to highlight is that the nine states analyzed exhibit similar percentages in 
each of the types of collaboration. The observed variations in the table are not 
pronounced, which suggests that these are relatively stable features of the Brazilian 
scientific production space. To support this conclusion, we look at a region that is very 
different from that of the Northeast.  Table 7 shows the collaboration of the five most 
productive states. The main feature here is the degree of in-state collaboration which is 
more pronounced with respect to the case of the Northeast since in all cases it exceeds 
50%. For each state in the table, the other four states represent approximately the same 
proportion of collaboration (fourth column as all the remaining states in Brazil (fifth 
column). Clearly, the concentration in collaboration in the institutions of these five states 
stands out.  But it is also clear that, even though it is smaller, their collaboration with states 
less prominent in the Brazilian scientific sphere is not totally marginal. Finally, it is worth 
noting the remarkable similarity in the profiles of the five states in Table 7, which might 
be suggesting – as mentioned before – consistent trends in this field of collaboration. 

This look at collaboration within Brazil in recent years has highlighted the fact that low 
international collaboration in co-authored publications of a country does not imply 
institutional inbreeding or parochialism. Collaboration between authors from different 
states is a characteristic feature of the Brazilian scientific production space as analyzed 
through the SciELO documents of the last five years, that is, the period 2016-2020. This is 
a question of a practice of collaboration between teams located in clearly different 
spaces/environments, 
with 
a 
diverse 
academic 
history 
and 
processes 
of 
institutionalization that affect, in particular, some disciplinary areas since, as might be 
expected, inter-state collaboration is less prevalent among those disciplinary areas that 
tend to have fewer authors in their articles. 

The concentration of the authors responsible for these documents in the institutions of 
the Southeastern and Southern states does not, however, ignore the significant 
collaboration with colleagues from the rest of the country’s extensive geography. In 
addition, states such as São Paulo, Minas Gerais or Rio de Janeiro can hardly be considered 
as homogeneous within each other. They include a diversity of institutions – federal, state, 
private – among which presumably there is also collaboration in terms of their 
publications. And this gives further nuance to the idea of academic inbreeding in terms of 
authors’ affiliation within the same state given that, for example, collaboration between 
authors from Unicamp (Universidade Estadual de Campinas) with those of USP 
(Universidade de São Paulo), both in the same state, can hardly be classified as a 
provincial interaction.  

Many experts warned as early as the 1980s and 1990s that the science produced in Latin 
America was not visible to the world because it was rarely cited in "international" 
databases, which is why Gibbs (1995) spoke of a "lost science of the third world". In fact, 
it was in those decades that an infrastructure for scholarly communication was 
strengthened in the region which sought to raise the value of research outputs produced 
in this part of the world with its uniqueness in disciplines, research agendas and language 
of publication. This encouraged policies and the regional management of the circulation 
of Latin American science, giving rise to a strong and consolidated structure of journals, 
indexing bases, institutional repositories, networks of regional institutes, and large 
national universities that became regular publishers of academic journals. This 
arrangement grew in a fragmented way because, despite the best of institutional efforts, 
interoperable systems still have not been achieved to allow for the scientific production 
of Latin America to be known, visible and valued world-wide. It is with this objective in 
mind that the OLIVA project was developed at the Universidad Nacional de Cuyo 
(Mendoza, Argentina) to enhance the value of the production assessed and indexed in 
articles in such a way as to have a growing presence and impact in academic assessment 
systems. 

The corpus of documents analyzed in this work is the result of a database that combines 
information from two of the main indexers of Latin American and Caribbean scientific 
journals - SciELO and Redalyc. Thanks to the collaborative work of both institutions and 
CLACSO, we can appreciate the decades of effort that these open access publishing 
platforms have made and the extent to which there now is a Latin American production 
with high standards of quality whose value is still under-represented in current academic 
assessment models. Perhaps one of the main findings that emerges from the analysis is 
the longevity and diversity of the journals, some of which were created in the late 
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries8. There is also a diverse representation of 
disciplinary areas, modes of collaboration, languages of publication, types of authorship, 
authors' geographic state of affiliation, and publishing institutions over a period of more 
than a century of Latin American and Caribbean scientific production. 

The analysis of collaboration structures in a corpus such as OLIVA delved into the 
complexities of national collaboration to distinguish between co-authorships belonging 
to the same institution and those collaborations that represent a combination of efforts 
from different universities and especially from different states, thereby examining the 
geospatial dynamics of national scientific production. The analysis of Brazil, which 
represents one-third of the total number of journals as well as half of the authors and 
articles in the OLIVA database, showed that there is strong collaboration between 
researchers from different states throughout the country. We also characterized the 
states that, by their own importance, play an important role in the corpus and yet show 
significant collaboration with colleagues from states with less weight in the Brazilian 
scientific system. 

An examination of the publishing institutions of the journals in the OLIVA corpus shows 
structural differences with mainstream commercial journals, such as in the degrees of 
autonomy and attachment to the academic community. Neubert and Rodrigues (2021) 
analyzed Latin American production in the Web of Science and observed that these 
articles were published in 11,965 scientific journals, with commercial publishers 
accounting for 56.48%, universities for 18.30%, and associations for 19.25%. The SciELO 
and Redalyc journals, in contrast, have an eminently academic trait, being published 
almost entirely by universities, scientific societies and government agencies, offering a 
platform of editorial services anchored in the public domain. In the region, the creation of 
journals has historically been in the hands of the scholarly community, which continues 
to support them materially even though the evaluation systems encourage their 
academics to publish in mainstream journals. 

Another intrinsic feature of scholarly communication in Latin America is the widespread 
adoption of Open Access which is fostered by the decision of research funding agencies, 
universities, scientific societies, and publishers to provide not-for-profit infrastructures 
for visibility in the global flow of scientific information. It is worth noting that the entire 
OLIVA corpus is available in open access and full text on the websites of the SciELO 
Network and Redalyc platform, as well as on the websites of each journal, and in thematic 
and institutional repositories. In addition to the production analyzed in these 1,720 
journals, there are thousands of other journals in the region that show evidence of long-
term operation that have been key to expanding open access in the region. 

The study of the production published in SciELO and Redalyc has allowed us to discuss 
some suppositions that permeate the recognition of scientific knowledge, in other words, 
that of the prioritization of the journals commonly characterized as "mainstream" while 
discrediting the rest. OLIVA reveals two dimensions of this scientific communication 
space of increasing editorial quality. First, its diversity, and thematic and linguistic 
breadth. Second, the international and inter-institutional collaboration at the national 
level, which encourages a perspective beyond the traditional opposing duality of the 
"mainstream or global circuit” - led by the most prestigious journals - and the "regional or 
local circuits", with limited circulation. This duality, promoted in the context of the 
commercialization of journals and reinforced as a "should be" by the assessment systems 
through the use of the journals' Impact Factor, has undervalued non-commercial open 
access publications such as those we are concerned with in this study. This perspective 
has also failed to appreciate the forms of intra-national collaboration whose complexity 
we seek to show in this paper for the case of Brazil, and which are of particular relevance 
for research addressing local issues that are enhanced in particular in this type of 
collaboration. We also point out the linguistic particularities of Brazil which explain, to a 
large extent, trends in collaboration when nationally edited journals are up against 
mainstream journals. 

The forms of collaboration shown by the journals indexed in SciELO and Redalyc, and 
their academic and university attachment, show that this is a system that promotes broad 
dissemination and multi-scale research programs, which can very effectively address the 
current needs of scholarly communication in times of open science. This is not only based 
on Latin American capabilities in terms of professional scientific publishing, indexing and 
open access, but also on its experience in producing interoperable regional indicators as 
demonstrated in the joint publication developed in collaboration with the main indexing 
systems in the region, PKP and CLACSO (Alperin, Babini and Fischmann, 2014). More 
efforts in this direction to improve the visibility and comparability of Latin American 
production will enable the region to counteract a major trend in two and, until now, 
separate but increasingly intrinsically linked forces: commercial threats to the open 
science movement and the urgent need for a reform of the traditional forms of research 
assessment. It is our hope that the OLIVA project will stimulate more and more 
collaborative spaces to promote a socially relevant and participatory science. 
