Status: Preprint has been published in a journal as an article
DOI of the published article: https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2021.637897
From modern Planetary Health to decolonial promotion of One
Health of Peripheries
Oswaldo Santos Baquero, Mario Nestor Benavides Fernández, Myriam Acero Aguilar
https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Submitted on: 2021-03-26
Posted on: 2021-03-26 (version 1)
(YYYY-MM-DD)
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
From modern Planetary Health to decolonial promotion of One Health 
of Peripheries
Oswaldo Santos Baquero1,2*, Mario Nestor Benavidez Fernández3, 
Myriam Acero Aguilar4
1 Department of Preventive Veterinary Medicine and Animal Health, School of 
Veterinary Medicine and Animal Science, University of São Paulo. Av. Prof. 
Orlando Marques de Paiva, 87, Cidade Universitária, CEP: 05508-270, São Paulo, 
SP, Brazil. ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2695-7946
2 Research Group on Peripheries, Institute of Advanced Studies, University of 
São Paulo. Rua da Praça do Relógio, 109, Cidade Universitária, CEP: 05508-050, 
São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
3 Universidad de San Buenaventura. Facultad de Humanidades y Ciencias de la 
Educación. Carrera 8H 172 20 Bogotá, Colombia. ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-
0002-1183-214X
4 Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Facultad de Medicina Veterinaria y de 
Zootecnia, Departamento de Salud Animal, Grupo de Investigación en Estudios 
Humano Animal. Calle 45 35 00 bogotá, Colombia. 
ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0107-4960
* Correspondence: Oswaldo Santos Baquero, baquero@usp.br
Abstract
The concept of Planetary Health has recently emerged in the global North as a 
concern with the global effects of degraded natural systems on human health. It 
calls for urgent and transformative actions. However, the problem and the call to
solve it are far from new. Planetary health is a colonial approach that disregards 
alternative knowledge that over millennia have accumulated experiences of 
sustainable and holistic lifestyles. It reinforces the monologue of modernity 
without realizing that threats to “planetary health” reside precisely in its very 
approach. It insists on imposing its recipes on political, epistemological, and 
ontological peripheries created and maintained through coloniality. The Latin 
American decolonial turn has a long tradition in what could be called a 
“transformative action”, going beyond political and economic crises to face a 
more fundamental crisis of civilization. It deconstructs, with other decolonial 
movements, the fallacy of a dual world in which the global North produces 
epistemologies, while the rest only benefit from and apply those epistemologies.
One Health of Peripheries is a field of praxis in which the health of multispecies 
collectives and the environment they comprise is experienced, understood, and 
transformed within symbolic and geographic peripheries, ensuing from 
marginalizing apparatuses. In the present article, we show how the decolonial 
promotion of One Health of Peripheries contributes to think and advance 
decentralized and plural practices to attend to local realities. We propose seven 
actions for such promotion.
Keywords: One Health of Peripheries, Modernity, Coloniality, Decolonial
Turn, Health Inequities, One Health, Planetary Health, More-than-
human Biopolitics
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
1
Introduction
Modernity is a popular concept, often referred to the idea of progress, to positive
and necessary changes to build a better future. Less famous is the critical 
comprehension of the modernity/coloniality cultural complex. This is not 
fortuitous; modernity is a narrative built by Western civilization to highlight its 
achievements (rationality, science, and technology) and conceal its dark side 
(genocide, expropriation, forced displacement, and exploitation) (1–3).
This dark side of modernity is coloniality; it is “the underlying logic of the 
foundation and unfolding of Western civilization from Renaissance to today of 
which historical colonialisms have been a constituent, although, downlpayed 
dimension” (3). Colonialism designates the political, social, and cultural 
domination in territories occupied by Europeans, typical of the period of 
colonization of America, which, far from being the discovery of America, was 
what Dussel called the discovery of an invasion and framed as the very origin of 
modernity (4).
The global South is a metaphor regarding the “field of epistemic challenges that 
seek to repair the damage and historical impacts caused by capitalism in its 
colonial relationship with the world” [translation is ours] (5). Therefore, the 
global South also includes Northern places. With the epistemologies of the 
South, the critiques of modernity cease to be exclusively internal (from the 
global North), making the colonial aspects of modern rhetoric evident (6). The 
epistemologies of the South show us that beyond economic crises, dictatorships,
and corrupt governments, we are experiencing a crisis of civilization of more 
than five centuries (7), with devastating effects on health.
In Latin America, philanthropic support has helped to mitigate some of the 
health effects of the crisis of civilization, transferring small fractions of the 
wealth of a few rich philanthropists to the poorest, without affecting the 
consumption and accumulation patterns of the former, and enabling major 
transformations in the material conditions of the latter. This has made it possible
to legitimize the elites and avoid responsibility for the poverty they generate 
and the exploration that underpins the growth of their wealth. The Rockefeller 
Foundation’s philanthropy has been around since the early 20th century, with 
strategies to shape the health professions and structure public health services 
(8–10).
But such strategies have also generated decolonial health responses. This is the 
case of Collective Health (9,11), Critical Epidemiology (12), and South-South 
International Health (13). However, these responses inherited part of the 
colonial anthropocentrism and have treated health as a predominantly human 
phenomenon. Other beings appear only as vectors, reservoirs, or determinants 
of human health. Notwithstanding, it is worth highlighting the progress of the 
Ecuadorian school in its debates on the social determination of animal health 
(14) and animal production management (15).
In the report of The Rockefeller Foundation–Lancet Commission on Planetary 
Health, nonhuman beings appear within terrestrial systems that only have 
instrumental value, due to their role in human health (16). Like previous projects
of the Foundation, Planetary Health can be read as a proposal for preserving the
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
capitalist order in the face of the perceived need to avoid environmental 
deterioration and its impacts on human health.
One Health of Peripheries is a decolonial response to experience, understand, 
and improve the well-being of marginalized multispecies collectives (17). 
Baquero presents the biopolitics, social determination, and field of praxis of One 
Health of the Peripheries, highlighting the symbolic character of the peripheries 
and leaving implicit its decolonial foundation (17). One of the aspects that shows
this foundation is the opposition to animalization, a marginalizing apparatus 
registering nonhuman animals and marginalized human groups in colonial 
domination spaces that determine epidemiological profiles.
The excess risks underlying peripheral epidemiological profiles increase the 
relevance of primary, secondary, and tertiary prevention, that is, of measures 
directed at specific factors to (1) avoid, (2) early detect and treat, and (3) 
mitigate the effects of diseases or ill-health. However, the preventive approach 
is limited to a negative ontology of health, to the absence of diseases or ill-
health. On the other hand, health promotion works on a positive ontology, 
regarding health as a resource and capability to live well. Despite the overlap 
between prevention and promotion, as the first subsumes the second 
(environmental sanitation prevents diseases and not having diseases increases 
the resources and capabilities to live well), the absence of diseases or ill-health 
is not enough in terms of promotion because that absence does not exhaust the 
possibility of a better life. Promotion is not restricted to risk factors or specific 
problems; it also works on resources and capabilities.
One Health of Peripheries is inherently preventive because its field of praxis 
generates excess risk and disease burden. However, peripheries are more than 
collections of risks and injuries; they have structurally oppressed resources and 
capabilities, which the ecology of knowledge can release in a multispecies 
health framework. Such release is the task of decolonial promotion of One 
Health of Peripheries.
In what follows, we present the myth of modernity and then continue with the 
colonial precedents of the Rockefeller Foundation’s philanthropy and the 
coloniality in the report of The Rockefeller Foundation–Lancet Commission on 
Planetary Health. After this decolonial turn, we move to the ecology of 
knowledge to frame our proposal of decolonial promotion of One Health of 
Peripheries.
2
Modernity and coloniality
Modernity designates a political, social, and cultural European process that in 
the 15th century allowed the emergence of capitalism, and since then, its 
development as a global economic system (18). Modernity has as a backdrop 
the idea of unlimited progress. Economic and social changes promoted by 
scientific and technological development promised the construction of a better 
future (19). The Eurocentric and colonial character of modernity has been 
questioned, particularly by the Latin American decolonial turn (20–22). Dussel 
pointed out two connotations of modernity: one, primary and positive, that 
understands modernity as an effort of rational emancipation that opens for 
humanity a new historical development, and the other, secondary and negative, 
in which modernity justifies irrational violence (23). According to this 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
perspective, the only civilizing possibility for the “barbarian” peoples seems to 
be their gradual incorporation into the modern and Eurocentric project that 
depends to a large extent on the epistemological authority and alleged 
ontological superiority (racial, ethnic, geopolitical) of the global North (2). The 
incorporation to that project (modernization) has not been, however, an 
encounter between equals, but on the contrary, a violent conversion.
This violence, invested with heroism and redemption, marks the myth of 
modernity, synthesized by Dussel in seven elements: ‘(1) Modern (European) 
civilization understands itself as the most developed, the superior, civilization. 
(2) This sense of superiority obliges it, in the form of a categorical imperative, as
it were, to “develop” (civilize, uplift, educate) the more primitive, barbarous, 
underdeveloped civilizations. (3) The path of such development should be that 
followed by Europe in its own development out of antiquity and the Middle Ages.
(4) Where the barbarian or the primitive opposes the civilizing process, the 
praxis of modernity must, in the last instance, have recourse to the violence 
necessary to remove the obstacles to modernization. (5) This violence, which 
produces, in many different ways, victims, takes on an almost ritualistic 
character: the civilizing hero invests his victims (the colonized, the slave, the 
woman, the ecological destruction of the earth, etc.) with the character of being 
participants in a process of redemptive sacrifice. (6) From the point of view of 
modernity, the barbarian or primitive is in a state of guilt (for, among other 
things, opposing the civilizing process). This allows modernity to present itself 
not only as innocent but also as a force that will emancipate or redeem its 
victims from their guilt. (7) Given this “civilizing” and redemptive character of 
modernity, the suffering and sacrifices (the costs) of modernization imposed on 
“immature” peoples, enslaved races, the “weaker” sex, etcetera, are inevitable 
and necessary’ (1).
Such suffering and sacrifice become less visible in the light of the seduction that
turns modernity into aspiration, rather than imposing it through systematic and 
constant repression: “colonizers also imposed a mystified image of their own 
patterns of producing knowledge and meaning. At first, they placed these 
patterns far out of reach of the dominated. Later, they taught them in a partial 
and selective way, in order to co-opt some of the dominated into their own 
power institutions. Then European culture was made seductive: it gave access to
power. After all, beyond repression, the main instrument of all power is its 
seduction. Cultural Europeanisation was transformed into an aspiration. It was a 
way of participating and later to reach the same material benefits and the same 
power as the Europeans: viz, to conquer nature in short for ‘development’. 
European culture became a universal cultural model” (2). But not everyone 
attains the aspiration. The ontological superiority of the myth of modernity limits
material benefits and the exercise of power so that racial, ethnic, and 
geocultural attributes frustrate or advance the aspiration, depending on their 
configuration (24).
The configurations of these attributes define the place of hegemonic production 
of epistemologies of health and, what is more important, how they materialize in
health. Within modernity, the global North produces epistemologies. In contrast, 
the global South is limited to benefit from the transfer of knowledge or  
knowledge building within the epistemological production patterns established 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
by modernity. As we will see, the global North’s health discourses align with the 
interests of the dominant groups of dominant nations, and to the extent that 
they neglect the interests of peripheral groups, they induce particular 
epidemiological profiles.
3
Colonial precedents of Rockefeller Foundation
Capitalism, made possible by coloniality, generates figures like the one recently 
reported by Coffey and collaborators (25): in 2019, the world's billionaires, just 
2,153 people, accumulated more wealth than 4.6 billion people. In other words, 
in a world population of 7.7 billion, the wealth concentrated by 0.000028% of 
the population was greater than that of 59.7%. In light of the so-called Law of 
diminishing marginal utility, figures like that make possible the transfer of small 
fractions of wealth from the wealthiest to the poorest without affecting the 
former’s consumption and accumulation patterns  while enabling major 
transformations in the material conditions of the latter. On the one hand, we can
see these transformations as philanthropic successes. On the other hand, as a 
strategy to legitimize the elites and avoid responsibility for the poverty they 
generate and the exploitation that underpins the growth of their wealth. The 
dialectics between both sides reproduces inequalities and determine conditions 
of possibility to produce alternatives.
The mentioned transfers can increase the symbolic and cultural capital of elites 
and consequently their economic capital. Moreover, legitimization strategies are
also economic investments. Among the main strategies is the influence on the 
educational system to favor the reproduction of the dominant classes by forming
profiles to occupy high positions in the state bureaucracy and the field of power 
(9). It was not by chance that in the early twentieth century, the United States’ 
industrialization allowed the accumulation of great fortunes and the 
establishment of influential universities (today leading prestigious global 
rankings according to modern criteria), many of which are partially homonyms 
with their founders’ magnates (26). John D Rockefeller, the first world billionaire 
and owner of the Standard Oil Company, contributed to founding the University 
of Chicago (26).
According to Vieria-da-Silva (9), philanthropists at the beginning of the 20th 
century anticipated a social reform that they saw as inevitable, investing in 
scientific approaches to social issues that did not threaten the capitalist order. 
The Rockefeller Sanitary Commission was created in 1909 (The Rockefeller 
Institute in 1901 and The Rockefeller Foundation in 1913). One of its central 
objectives was the industrialization of the agrarian South and its articulation to 
the capitalist interests of the North (9).
The Rockefeller Foundation continued to invest and intervene in the research 
and development of medicine (9). In 1947, its official Fred Sopper became 
director of the Opas, an institution subordinated to the United States’ health 
policies and officially directed from that country until 1958 (9). Only after the 
Second War, with the creation of the WHO, the Opas became a Regional Office 
of that organization. During the Cold War, the United States’ foreign policy, in 
defense of free trade and foreign investment, involved the creation of a 
favorable image (9). According to Tota, Nelson Rockefeller, Coordinator of the 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
Office of the Coordinator of the Inter-Americans Affairs, contributed to an explicit
project to promote the United States’ image (27).
In the dispute over the monopoly of legitimate healthcare practices in Latin 
America, the Rockefeller Foundation's goal was to replace the French model (9). 
In the 1950s, the Opas was fundamental to this objective, through its strategies 
to spread Preventive Medicine, an ideological movement to protect the 
monopoly of Private Medicine, in the face of two problems: the increasing cost of
Medical Care in the United States and the possibility of a State intervention (8). 
These problems already worried the American Associations of medical colleges, 
as Arouca showed (8) by citing Fishbein and Bierring (28) : “There is a special 
need that the medical profession develops some method by which the greatest 
possibilities of modern medicine in the way of diagnosis, treatment and 
prevention of diseases, may be brought within the reach of all people. This 
function, it is believed, should be performed by the medical profession and not 
to any form of State Medicine” [translation and emphasis is ours].
4
Coloniality in the report of the Rockefeller Foundation–Lancet 
Commission on Planetary Health 
The report of the Rockefeller Foundation-Lancet Commission on Planetary Health
maintains the Foundation’s historical concern with inequality, the health of the 
poorest, and the environment. Such insistence is again a colonial proposal for 
preserving the capitalist order in the face of the perceived need to avoid 
environmental deterioration and its impacts on human health.
Although we discussed some Rockefeller Foundation colonial precedents in the 
previous section, it is worth noting that Planetary Health also has precedents 
omitted in the report (29). Over the last half-century, integrative medicine, 
holistic medicine, and many scholars have talked about the need for a healthy 
planet, even using the expression “planetary health” (29). So in what follows, we
continue previous contributions that look beyond the ahistorical and colonial 
perspective of the Rockefeller Foundation-Lancet Commission report (29–31).
In a typically colonial attitude, the report ignores an enormous diversity of 
worldviews that do not separate humans from nature or think that degrading 
nature does not affect human health and well-being. Worldviews with millenary 
legacies in which it is not new to think that health and well-being are also 
nature: “The importance of the natural environment in supporting human health
and wellbeing is only becoming clear as the Earth's systems are degraded” 
[emphasis is ours] (16).
How is the modern trajectory of humanity progressing if there have never been 
so many victims of genocide, dispossession, forced displacement, and 
exploitation? Which humanity is the one that progresses? The same colonizing 
and modern humanity for which there is only one civilization, even though 
Western civilization is known to coexist with other civilizations: “Put simply, 
planetary health is the health of human civilization and the state of the natural 
systems on which it depends” (16).
It is not the humanity of backward and irrational peoples with visionary healers. 
It is rational humanity with visionaries from the global North: “[…] Tony 
McMichael whose visionary book Planetary Overload, published more than 20 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
years ago, presciently addressed many of the issues that confront the world at 
present” (16).
The previous decolonial reading of the report does not imply its total rejection. 
The problems pointed out by the Commission must be solved, and it is pertinent 
to evaluate the attempts at resolution, for which, as the Commission indicates, 
quantitative indicators are helpful. But these should be used considering their 
different implications.
Let's look at two examples from the report. Between 1990 and 2012, the 
percentage of stunted children decreased from 50% to 30%, a significant 
advance in relative terms. However, in absolute terms, this reduction 
represented an increase of 14 million children, a number only exceeded by the 
total population of 7 European Union member states in 2011. Overall, there 
were 58 million children—predominantly from the global South—stunted in 
2012, a number surpassed only by the population size of 4 European Union 
member states in 2011. Thus, in its absolute and relative version, a numerical 
indicator tells different stories that must be considered in a critical and 
integrated way. In the global South, it is no progress to have millions of 
additional stunted children, while wealth concentration in the global North 
continues. Moreover, relative indicators fuel a discourse of hope, of the 
possibility of unlimited “progress”, causing increasingly smaller proportional 
damages.
The other example regards reducing the percentage of people in extreme 
poverty during the last two centuries. This reduction represents important 
improvements in the well-being of those who come out of extreme poverty. 
However, when the threshold is USD$1.9/day, those who survive on USD$2/day 
are not in extreme poverty. Who decides that surviving on USD$2/day (or on 
USD$50/day, in a state of frequent frustration at trying to satisfy manufactured 
consumer needs) is not a state of extreme poverty? Analyzing thresholds 
together with the underlying distribution  allows comparison all individuals of the
population. Otherwise, only mentioning the reduction in the fraction or number 
of individuals within unfavorable categories may conceal that changes occur in 
intervals far from thresholds that decision-makers would accept for themselves 
in the global North.
Thresholds help to identify limits from which damages become irreversible: 
“Action has to be taken before irreversible changes in key Earth systems occur, 
which will require decision-making under uncertainty (panel 13) about the 
critical thresholds or rates of deterioration of these systems” (16). In this sense 
of warning of catastrophes, thresholds are helpful to raise awareness and 
generate changes. However, at the same time, they can promote policies of 
acceptable minimums to avoid only irreversible changes instead of promoting 
multispecies flourishing.
Policies of acceptable minimums are symptomatic of crisis that leads not to 
crossing or scarcely crossing minimum thresholds. A crisis that, when it 
becomes persistent, ceases to be explained and becomes an explanation (32). 
Thus, a previous level of causality that perpetuates the status quo is lost. This is 
evident in the report, in its fragmented descriptions of the threats to Planetary 
Health. For example, it presents changes in land use as a human action on the 
“environment”, with deleterious effects on health, without considering their 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
causes (16). From the perspective of One Health of Peripheries, the problem to 
solve resides in the capitalization of land that generates forced displacement of 
millions of people and animals, reduces biodiversity, and worsens the climate 
crisis.
The report identifies several causes of deterioration in health, and we agree with
that identification. Our critique here is about the omission of previous causal 
levels. We also agree with the report in other points: the inconvenience of GDP 
as a measure of progress; technological improvements are not sufficient to 
reduce the environmental footprint because they can stimulate consumption 
and increase the footprint (rebound effect); governance transformations are 
necessary. We agree with a good part of the key messages and the conclusions. 
Our disagreement is, as shown by the previous decolonial viewpoint, in the 
interpretation of these messages and in the premises of the conclusions. From 
our reading, the report's proposal is convenient to preserve the status quo that 
makes the health of the planet ill.
The report calls for price stability and malnutrition management to fight hunger 
but not for food sovereignty and security: “[E]nsure stability of food prices and 
protect the vulnerable from variability that does occur; and tackle malnutrition” 
(16).
Again in a context of hunger, the proposal is to improve the access of the poor 
to technology to reduce inequalities, without discussing the control of 
technology or technological benchmarks; thus, helping oligopolies of the 
technology market to have more clients: “If these [modern] technologies are to 
make a useful contribution to the reduction of global hunger they have to both 
protect the environment and be accessible to farmers in low-income settings, 
otherwise inequities will persist and increase” (16).
In modern-colonial logic, it is essential to maintain epistemological hegemony. 
Those who do not exercise that hegemony must support it to benefit from it: 
“But to have a real effect, and to change the trajectory of planetary health, 
these local movements will need coherence, organization, and solidarity with the
scientific and health communities” (16).
Those who exercise it have a voice and can be even more influential with the 
support of those who do not have voice: “The scientific and health communities,
in turn, will be much more successful in influencing decision-makers who are 
feeling pressure for change from their constituents than they would without the 
support of civil society” (16).
In the medical care cost crisis, Private Medicine was clear and explicit in its 
intention to maintain the hegemony and avoid the participation of State 
Medicine (see the previous section). Similarly, the Rockefeller Commission is 
clear and explicit in its intention to maintain a top-down logic in which the 
owners of economic and scientific capital reserve for themselves the right to 
decide what is relevant: “Research funders and the academic community frame 
what questions get asked by scientists and can steer development of new ways 
of addressing major gaps in knowledge, scientific awareness, and academic 
focus” (16).
It is the modern logic imposed over centuries  that says (note again the use of 
acceptable minimums and the meaning of acceptance): “At present trends, even
with optimistic assumptions, the eradication of poverty (with a poverty line 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
income of USD$5/day per person) will take 200 years, or 100 years for a poverty
line of USD$1.25/day” (16). So there is no much to expect from modern trends.
It is necessary to overcome the modern crisis of civilization, starting from the 
first challenge identified in the report: “conceptual and empathy failures 
(imagination challenges)” (16).
5
Ecology of knowledge
The previous decolonial reading of the report, pointing to some of its 
possibilities, limits and obstacles, commits us from the global South to 
understand deeper causal levels and transform the current relationship between
nature, health, and society. One possibility, not only alternative but above all 
critical, is the “ecology of knowledge” proposed by Santos, framed in what he 
calls “epistemologies of the South”, that is, the claim of the global South for 
“new processes of production, of valuing scientific and non-scientific valid 
knowledge, and of new relationships between different types of knowledge, 
based on the practices of the classes and social groups that have suffered, in a 
systematic way, destruction, oppression, and discrimination caused by 
capitalism, colonialism, and the naturalization of inequality” [translation is ours] 
(33).
According to Santos, non-Western forms of thought have been treated in an 
abyssal way by hegemonic modern Western thought, referring by abyssal to 
visible and invisible distinctions that divide social reality into two universes: one 
on this side of the line—the modern Western societies—, and the other beyond 
the line—the colonial societies (33). For instance, in the field of modern 
knowledge, the visible line separates science from philosophy and theology, 
establishing the superiority of science through scientific criteria instead of 
reason or faith. The invisible line divides these types of knowledge from 
indigenous, popular, and other types of knowledge. The universe on the other 
side of the line disappears as reality. It becomes non-existent (in the sense of 
irrelevant and incomprehensible), radically excluded because it is beyond the 
universe of what the accepted conception of inclusion considers to be its Other. 
In colonial societies, appropriation and violence segregate multispecies 
collectives, that is, subjects, nature, bodies, and knowledge that are on the side 
of denial, translating into permanent hierarchies (33).
Western modernity eliminates any reality that is on the other side of the line. 
Everything that does not fit in true-false or legal-illegal axes occurs in colonial 
zones (33). The abyssal lines are constitutive of the political and cultural 
relations based on the West and the interactions in the modern world-system 
(33). Thus, disqualification of non-modern knowledge globally underscores social
and cognitive injustice.
By bringing these elements into the discussion about Planetary Health and One 
Health as alternatives for understanding and transforming the current 
relationship between nature, health, and society, the ecology of knowledge or 
post-abyssal thinking invites us to reflect and ask ourselves, among other 
things: if appropriation and violence established colonial societies, how can we 
now receive these philanthropic proposals under conditions of equality and 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
justice instead of modernization imperatives? How to move towards a true post-
abyssal thought?
Post-abyssal thinking takes the perspective of the other side of the line 
“precisely because the other side of the line has been the realm of the 
unthinkable in Western modernity” [translation is ours] (33). Post-abyssal 
thinking is learning from the epistemologies of the South, which confronts the 
“monoculture of modern science” against the ecology of knowledge. It frames 
science as one among many plural knowledge constituents, making possible a 
counter-hegemonic science to support marginalized multispecies collectives in 
their fight to get out of peripheries.
What is at stake is not only an abstract cognitive justice. The ecology of 
knowledge revalues the concrete interventions that different knowledge can 
offer (33). In it, knowledge hierarchies are context-dependent and not universal. 
The ecology of knowledge invites us to build “an alternative of alternatives” 
based on permanent epistemological surveillance and intercultural translation. 
An alternative to avoid that Planetary Health, One Health, or any other approach
become a renewed version of abyssal thinking, a softened revision of coloniality.
From the ecology of knowledge we can stand against marginalizing apparatuses 
that create peripheries, unjust epidemiologic profiles, and only accept 
epistemologies of health from the global North.
6
Decolonial promotion of One Health of Peripheries
There are health-promoting indigenous lifestyles that serve as a reference to 
promote health in non-indigenous spaces. However, the adaptation of 
indigenous knowledge and experiences to non-indigenous peripheries leads to 
other types of practices. Not recognizing this transformation opens up colonizing
possibilities that are counterproductive to health promotion. Globalization makes
all locals contribute in some way to the reproduction of a colonial structure. 
Therefore, any place of decolonial resistance also has a colonial side, no matter 
how small. From this situation, one of the tasks for the decolonial promotion of 
One Health of Peripheries is to deconstruct, through the ecology of knowledge, 
the marginalizing apparatuses underlying health inequities suffered by multiple 
species (17). These are the issues addressed in this section.
In One Health of Peripheries, the peripheries are a symbolic category expressed 
in epidemiologic profiles (17). The global South is a heterogeneous geopolitical 
periphery within that category. Its health dimension has been theorized and 
transformed by Latin American Social Medicine since the ‘70s, and nowadays in 
the form of Critical Epidemiology, Collective Health, and South-South 
International Health. In a broader scope, this periphery, the global South, has 
promoted worldviews and lifestyles that in current rhetoric could be deemed 
sustainable, healthy, and instances of good living (34).
The indigenous worldviews and lifestyles, as well as the initiatives that have 
been based on them in the attempt to transform the institutional arrangement 
established and maintained by modernity, serve as a reference to promote One 
Health of Peripheries. Take good living (buen vivir) as an example, a concept 
from the Aimará suma qamaña and the Quechua sumak kawsay, incorporated in
the constitutions of Bolivia and Ecuador (34). Although a discussion of good 
living is beyond the scope of this manuscript, we stress that in its generality it is 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
a holistic proposal of self-care exercised by a plural totality in which local 
communities are not peripheral (34). On the contrary, Planetary Health aims to 
control natural systems and keep the global South in a subaltern position. In it, 
the only allowed aspiration is to benefit from the epistemological, scientific, and 
technological transfers of the global North.
In institutional terms, the meaning of good living has been substantially 
transformed. Ecuador and Bolivia incorporated the concept in the constitution in 
2008 and 2009, respectively, and just this by itself is a symbolic recognition of 
indigenous peoples. However, Solón point that in practice the recognized rights 
to nature and Mother Earth ended up being secondary to extractivist interests; 
the rhetoric of good living began to coexist with income redistribution policies 
that supported capitalist interests, allowed for the growth of oligopolies and 
encouraged patronage with some indigenous sectors (34). Paradoxically, under 
an indigenous government, it was possible to increase the acceptance of the 
modernization rejected for centuries, and the percentage of people who 
consider themselves indigenous fell from 62% to 41% between 1990 and 2013 
(34). This experience of good living institutionalization shows that despite the 
marked differences between projects with opposite origins in the decolonial-
colonial spectrum, the distance between discourses and implemented practices 
affects both poles of the spectrum. Contamination between the poles gives rise 
to the body of the spectrum.
The promotion of One Health of Peripheries must recognize and anticipate the 
distance between discourses and practices and the contamination between the 
decolonial and the colonial. Thus, it is convenient to consider the historical-social
processes that produce and reproduce social organization levels and their 
corresponding epidemiological profiles. Following Samaja (35), individuals are in 
the lower social organization level, and the world-system is in the upper level. 
Between the two, there are several levels (family, community, political-
administrative territorial divisions, contractual associations, and other 
institutions). Upper levels reproduce themselves by regulating the lower, but 
this regulation is not all-encompassing, allowing lower levels to produce partial 
changes in upper ones (35). The upper level reproduces a colonial structure 
through the regulation it exercises in lower levels, and these can partially 
change that structure through decolonial practices. This is the so called social 
determination framing collective health epistemology, and as it has unavoidable
multispecies dimensions, it also frames One Health of Peripheries (17). The 
promotion of One Health of Peripheries must occur in such dialectical 
movement, noting that partial decolonial changes means partial reproduction of 
coloniality. Such decolonial-colonial contradiction does not spare One Health of 
Peripheries, so proposals of promotion must take it into account to better match 
discourses and material possibilities.
The set of practices exercised from a given position has decolonial and colonial 
elements instead of decolonial or colonial elements.  So indigenous good living 
and the neoliberal rhetoric of good living differ in the direction and intensity of 
bias towards the decolonial-colonial extremes. Similarly, collective health 
education programs are not totally different from colonial higher education or 
Preventive Medicine in its colonial origins. The degree of difference depends on 
how close they get to the respective extremes.
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
The conditions of possibility of the peripheral cartography (17) also condition the
decolonial promotion of One Health of Peripheries. Exercising such promotion 
from within and outside that cartography challenges the center-periphery 
distinction through social determination movements. It is a utopian and 
dialectical promotion that, by centralizing peripheries, somehow reinforces the 
mentioned distinction and creates other peripheries. It is a glocal movement 
between localization and globalization (36).
So far, it may not be clear why it is convenient to add “One” to “Health of 
Peripheries”. It might well be Planetary Health of Peripheries to highlight the 
glocal movement between the global (planetary) and the local (peripheries). 
One Health is a conceptual framework that, like Planetary Health, brings 
together statements in favor of health for all, but in practice reinforces the myth
of modernity. In fact, One World One Health™ is a registered trademark, created
from the Wildlife Conservation Society conference, established in 2004 at 
Rockefeller University (37,38). The colonial venue for the event may seem like 
an isolated event that does not link the Wildlife Conservation Society to 
coloniality. But suffice it to remember that at the time of Rockefeller institutions’
foundation, the Bronx Zoo was exhibiting Ota Benga (the young Mbuti from what
is now the Democratic Republic of the Congo). The Wildlife Conservation Society
waited until 2020 to issue a public apology for its responsibility in the exhibition 
and the position of two of its founders, Madison Grant and Henry Fairfield 
Osborn, who were also founders of the American Eugenics Society and stood in 
favor of defendants in the Nuremberg trials (39). Unfortunately, the apology did 
not entirely reproach the colonial tradition of exhibiting other animals, perhaps 
mistaking exhibition as a necessary condition for wildlife conservation. They did 
not see anything wrong with exhibiting Ota Benga a century ago, and now they 
do not condemn the same practice with nonhuman animals. Hopefully, they will 
not need another century to abolish that practice.
In light of the colonial roots of One Health, which goes beyond what we briefly 
outlined (40), a decolonial proposal based on the One Health concept may seem 
contradictory. However, it is worth noting that One Health of Peripheries gives 
other meanings to One Health (17) and metabolizes contradictions through its 
social determination and the ecology of knowledge. Decolonizing One Health 
adds plurality to the Latin American health movements, thus increasing the 
strength and resilience of decolonial resistance.
In One Health, health is more-than-human, and it involves three inextricably 
related domains: human health, animal health, and environmental health (41). 
This differs from Planetary Health in which health is human and natural systems 
have instrumental value as determinants of health (16); the value of animals is 
instrumental to the extent that they contribute to the maintenance of natural 
systems favorable to human health. In One Health approaches, animals are also 
predominantly instrumental to human health (41); however, they appear as 
carriers of health, and animal health takes a fundamental role in a health that is 
not just human.
Biomedicine does not question the existence of physiopathological processes in 
animals in the same way that epidemiology does not question the existence of 
transmission dynamics between animals or between animals and humans. As 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
any other species, humans have similarities and differences with the individual 
and population biological processes of health-disease of other species.
The attribution of lower moral status to nonhuman animals for the simple fact of 
not belonging to the human species (speciesism) is as arbitrary as giving less 
value to some humans because of the race or gender attributes tied to them 
[racism and sexism] (42). Attempts to justify the inferior status of animals 
sometimes base arguments on the greater cognitive capacity of humans. 
However, many animals surpass the cognition of severely disabled humans, 
leading to justifications of moral differentiation in which not all humans are of 
equal value and some are of less value than many animals (42). Based on 
different criteria of cognitive capacity, the moral justifications to completely 
separate human beings from the rest of the animals are also problematic, 
revealing what Agamben calls the anthropological machine, an inclusion-
exclusion apparatus to separate humans from other animals, that the more it is 
renewed in the attempt to eliminate aporias, the more it reveals its arbitrariness
and contradiction (43).
The distinction between humans and nonhumans is a marginalizing apparatus in
the service of domination. It is a central dichotomy of modernity (44) through 
which dehumanization/animalization is all the more, the greater the distance of 
a being from the Western heterosexual male referent. It is epistemic violence 
that marginalizes humans, denies the subjectivity of other animals, and 
reconfigures animality as black, indigenous (44), female, and not heterosexual. 
In other words, it is more than human violence, with victims of multiple species. 
Animals are animalized insofar as they are inscribed in such animal space of 
colonial domination (44). The animalizing apparatus is also applied through 
colonial health practices that legitimize domination and represent it as a 
benevolent act.
In his analysis of 19th-century slave farms in Cuba, Camacho describes how 
Chateusalins, in his Vademecum of Cuban landowners, recommended masters 
of female slaves “to avoid giving them a harsh treatment”, to give them “better 
food than before” and to “protect them with delicacies and concessions to 
encourage them to preserve the product of their conception and raise their little 
offspring” [translation is ours] (45). In order to convince the masters, 
Chateusalins stated: “I know that in all farms where it reigns goodness and 
sweetness and attentions of the masters towards the blacks, there are many 
happy blacks whose mothers express their happiness in their singing and 
smiling faces [...] We have seen the books of gains and losses in which it 
appears that far from suffering a loss of 5.5%, which is what is generally 
calculated in this class of farms, it has been, on the contrary, an increase from 
4.5 to 5.5%, which shows the advantages that the careful treatment given to 
blacks brings with it” [translations is ours] (45).
This production-health binomial was framed in what we might understand as an 
epidemiological-zootechnical approach for slave control. Compartmentalization 
of facilities; populations divided according to demographic criteria of productive 
and reproductive interest; classification and monitoring of morbidity and 
mortality; prevention of communicable diseases; reproductive selection (genetic
improvement); hygiene, nutrition, socialization, and other generic practices to 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
reduce losses of biological capital [see the documented analyzes of such 
practices by Smithers and Camacho (45,46)].
The rationalizing discourse of such an approach—statistics, efficiency, evidence
—sought above all productivity, adding value to animalized commodities. The 
slaves were objects of knowledge and professional practices (medicine, 
statistics, anthropology) that produced “truths” on which the political and 
economic regime of the plantation depended (45). However, behind the 
pretense of truth and rationality, there was prejudice and contradiction. As 
shown by the Camacho’s analysis of the medical anthropology of Dumont (47), 
the medical literature provided descriptions of the black race as “prone to 
contracting several diseases”, while the anthropological one contributed with 
assertions of the type “lazy by nature”, “all blacks are polygamous”, “all are 
fetishists” [translations are ours] (45). On the other hand, the prescriptions of 
kindness and attention to the “human” needs of the slaves ironically opposed 
animalization, but this did not prevent its practice. The concern with the health 
of the slaves was a concern to maintain the profitability of their bodies and 
prevent them from transmitting diseases to the masters and their families, 
whose health did have value in itself. The epidemiology and zootechnics of 
slaves coexisted with torture practices to make them docile; their affections 
were irrelevant, except as instruments to increase productive and reproductive 
performance, through persuasive practices also reported in the medical 
literature (45). The advertisements of slaves with specific phenotypic 
characteristics and of drugs authorized by the government against diseases 
affecting slaves (45) showed how animalization was naturalized and legitimized 
by the State, the media, and the knowledge produced by epistemic authorities.
In essence, the discourse of slaves epidemiology and zootechnics is equivalent 
to the contemporary discourse of animal production epidemiology and animal 
science. Similarly, within animal welfare science we find benevolence narratives 
that legitimize livestock exploitation and add value to live commodities. In both 
cases (slaves and livestock), oppressive relationships are naturalized, and the 
better performance of productive and sanitary parameters serves as an 
indicator of improvements in well-being.
By deconstructing marginalizing apparatuses and giving rise to multispecies 
collectives in which the Other is not a commodity and its subjectivity is cared for
and respected, the possibilities of promotion cease to be variations of degree 
within a restrictive peripheral space and become variations of kind. Thus, 
abolishing slavery is a leap of promotion, allowing lifestyles—processes, 
capabilities, and health conditions—unattainable through the health practices 
restricted to the periphery of slavery. As health is inherently determined by 
value judgments, problematizing these judgments is essential to break the 
margins that limit the promotion of One Health of Peripheries.
The Ottawa Charter proposed five actions to promote health: 1. build healthy 
public policy; (2) create supportive environments; (3) strengthen community 
actions; (4) develop personal skills, and; (5) reorient health services (48). 
Redefining and complementing these actions with another two lead to the 
promotion of One Health of Peripheries: (1) deconstruct marginalizing 
apparatuses; (2) enrich the ecology of knowledge; (3) build healthy public 
policy; (4) create supportive environments; (5) strengthen community actions; 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
(6) develop more-than-human individual capabilities, and; (7) reorient health 
services. The deconstruction of marginalizing apparatuses is transversal to the 
other actions, and in that sense, we do not need to include it as a separate 
action. However, we can do the same with the others. Although one is 
transversal to the others, its explicit recognition reinforces its importance.
The seven actions require overcoming the primary challenge identified by the 
Lancet Commission on Planetary Health: “conceptual and empathy failures 
(imagination challenges)” (16), something particularly challenging within 
coloniality. However, for the very same reason, they contribute to the decolonial
turn. A turn that requires imagination and multispecies empathy, and might be 
seen as a turn from Capitalocene to Chthulocene (see in Haraway (49) a 
discussion of the Anthropocene, Capitalocene, and Chthulocene).
Despite the difficulties in promoting One Health of Peripheries, there are 
precedents for each of its seven actions. The first action deconstructs 
marginalization from a health perspective and finds support in the more-than-
human sociology (50–53), anthropology (54), biopolitics (43,55,56), critical 
studies (57), social work (58,59), theories justice (60–62), and moral philosophy 
(63,64) to name a few areas. The second action opens space to the 
epistemologies of the indigenous and non-indigenous global South (5), 
remembering that for the holistic sustainability “discovered” by Planetary 
Health, there are indigenous versions with centuries of successful experiences 
and that animalization is a colonial apparatus that oppresses human and 
nonhuman animals. Albeit insufficient, there is already public policy support for 
living cities (65), biodiversity and indigenous territories. More-than-human 
theories of labor (61), food sovereignty and security, sustainable agriculture, 
response to disasters, and degrowth perspectives can strengthen and expand 
this type of policies (third and fourth action). Moreover, participatory policies 
exist in various settings, community practices abound in the global South, and 
animal and environmental activism has been growing. This gives practical 
support to multispecies intersectionality (66), from which the fifth action can be 
worked out. An outstanding theoretical framework of justice is that of 
capabilities, already elaborated by Nussbaum to consider disability, nationality, 
and nonhuman animal species (60). Therefore, the sixth action, which in the 
version of the Ottawa Charter (fourth action) might seem applicable only to 
humans, has a robust theoretical support to consider peripheral subjects of 
different species. Even the seventh action has precedents. In Brazil, for instance,
the Unified Health System (national health system), in addition to having units 
dedicated to the epidemiological surveillance of zoonoses that also promote 
responsible care for animals, has dependencies dedicated to the health and 
protection of domestic animals. These dependencies have specific attributions 
regarding rescuing, sheltering and adoption, population control, and 
administration of veterinary hospitals offering free services (67). Undoubtedly, 
some of these precedents need reassessments and sound plural participation to 
preclude or stop being stratagems at the service of non-collective interests. But 
at the same time, they are precedents that in some way have locally fractured 
peripheries-making margins.
7
Conclusion
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
Coloniality did not end with colonialism, and the myth of modernity is at the 
kernel of the crisis of civilization we are living. Philanthropy allows material 
gains that significantly improve the livelihood of the poorest because they are in
conditions in which small aids make a big difference, even if they continue in 
poverty. Those improvements are convenient to legitimize vast accumulations of
wealth by a few rich philanthropists and massive deprivation suffered by billions 
(in 2019, the wealth concentrated by 0.000028% of the population was greater 
than that of 59.7%). Philanthropy in health has been a strategy to reinforce 
colonial epistemology and favor the interests of the global North, dictating what 
should be understood by health, how health problems should be solved, and 
how people should live to avoid them. The Rockefeller Foundation has been an 
icon of philanthrocapitalism, shaping Latin American health through public 
policy, education, and research. One of the Foundation’s recent proposals is 
Planetary Health, also framed in the rhetoric of the global North.
The ecology of knowledge, with its intercultural translation, is a response from 
the global South to repair the damage of coloniality. It encompasses indigenous 
and popular knowledge, Latin American health movements, and the counter-
hegemonic use of science. It can also make counter-hegemonic use of Planetary 
Health and One Health. An example of such use is One Health of Peripheries, at 
the same time a reconfiguration of One Health and Latin American health 
movements, strongly opposed animalization, that is to say, to the colonial space
oppressing animals and peripheral human groups. Extending the scope and the 
meaning of the Ottawa Charter proposal, the decolonial promotion of One Health
of Peripheries comprise seven actions: (1) deconstruct apparatuses of 
marginalization; (2) enrich the ecology of knowledge; (3) build healthy public 
policy; (4) create supportive environments; (5) strengthen community actions; 
(6) develop more-than-human individual capabilities, and; (7) reorient health 
services.
8
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any 
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest.
9
Author contributions
OSB conceived and structured the manuscript. OSB, MNB, and MAA wrote and 
critically review the manuscript.
10
Funding
Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (CAPES, Coordination for the
Improvement of Higher Education Personnel).
11
References
1. 
Dussel E. Eurocentrism and Modernity (Introduction to the Frankfurt 
Lectures). Bound 2 (1993) 20:65. doi:10.2307/303341
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
2. 
Quijano A. Coloniality and modernity/rationality. Cult Stud (2007) 21:168–
178. doi:10.1080/09502380601164353
3. 
Mignolo W. The darker side of western modernity: Global futures, 
decolonial options. Durham and London: Duke University Press (2011).
4. 
Dussel E. 1492 El encubrimiento del Otro: hacia el orgien del “mito de la 
Modernidad.” La Paz: Plural editores (1994).
5. 
Santos B de S, Meneses MP. Epistemologias do Sul. Sao Paulo: Cortez 
Editora (2010).
6. 
Mignolo WD. Citizenship, knowledge, and the limits of humanity. Am lit Hist
(2006) 18:312–331. doi:10.1093/alh/ajj019
7. 
Grosfoguel R. Caos sistémico, crisis civilizatoria y proyectos descoloniales: 
pensar más allá del proceso civilizatorio de la modernidad/colonialidad. 
Tabula Rasa (2016) 25:
8. 
Arouca S. O dilema preventivista: contribuição para a compreensão e 
crítica da medicina preventiva. Rio de Janeiro: UNESP Eitora (2003).
9. 
Vieira-da-Silva LM. O campo da saúde coletiva: gênese, transformações e 
articulações coma reforma sanitária. Salvador: Editora da UFBA, Editora 
Fiocruz (2018).
10. Moreira MC. The Rockefeller Foundation and the construction of a 
professional identity in nursing during Brazil’s first Republic. Hist Cienc 
Saude Manguinhos (1998) 5:621–645. doi:10.1590/s0104-
59701999000100005
11. Paim JS, De Almeida Filho N. Saúde coletiva: Uma “nova saúde pública” ou 
campo aberto a novos paradigmas? Rev Saude Publica (1998) 32:299–316.
doi:10.1590/s0034-89101998000400001
12. Breilh J. Epidemiologia crítica: ciência emancipadora e intercultural. 
Translated by Vera Ribeiro. Rio de Janeiro: Editora Fiocruz (2006).
13. Basile G. La salud internacional Sur Sur: hacia un giro decolonial y 
epistemológico. La Plata (2018).
14. Acero-Aguilar M. Zoonosis y otros problemas de salud pública relacionados 
con los animales: Reflexiones a propósito de sus aproximaciones teóricas y
metodológicas. Rev Gerenc y Polit Salud (2016) 15:232–245. 
doi:10.11144/Javeriana.rgyps15-31.zpsp
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
15. Andrade FAT. Propuesta teórico-metodológica de epidemiología crítica de 
la salud animal, primer acercamiento de aplicación en el caso de la fiebre 
aftosa en el Ecuador. (2019)
16. Whitmee S, Haines A, Beyrer C, Boltz F, Capon AG, De Souza Dias BF, Ezeh 
A, Frumkin H, Gong P, Head P, et al. Safeguarding human health in the 
Anthropocene epoch: Report of the Rockefeller Foundation-Lancet 
Commission on planetary health. Lancet (2015) 386:1973–2028. 
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60901-1
17. Baquero OS. One Health of Peripheries: biopolitics, social determination, 
and field of praxis. SciELO Prepr (2021) doi:10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2019
18. Daros W. La creación de la modernidad. Nuevos deseos e intereses de la 
humanidad. Invenio (2015) 18:51–65. Available at: 
https://www.redalyc.org/articulo.oa?id=87739279005
19. Jiménez RG. La modernidad: sintomatología de los procesos modernizantes
en las sociedades. Temas Cienc y Tecnol (1998) 2:55–67.
20. Grosfoguel R. The epistemic decolonial turn: Beyond political-economy 
paradigms. Cult Stud (2007) 21:211–223. 
doi:10.1080/09502380601162514
21. Escobar A. Worlds and knowledges otherwise: The Latin American 
modernity/ coloniality research program. Cult Stud (2007) 21:179–210. 
doi:10.1080/09502380601162506
22. Ballestrin L. América Latina e o giro decolonial. Rev Bras Ciência Política 
(2013)89–117. doi:10.1590/s0103-33522013000200004
23. Dussel E. “Europa, modernidad y eurocentrismo,” in La colonialidad del 
saber: eurocentrismo y ciencias sociales. Perspectivas latinoamericanas, 
ed. E. Lander (Consejo Latinoamericano de Ciencias Sociales).
24. Quijano A. “Colonialidade do poder e classificação social,” in 
Epistemologias do Sul, eds. B. de S. Santos,  M. P. Meneses (Sao Paulo: 
Cortez Editora), 84–130.
25. Coffey C, Espinoza Revollo P, Harvey R, Lawson M, Parvez Butt A, Piaget K, 
Sarosi D, Thekkudan J. Time to Care: Unpaid and underpaid care work and 
the global inequality crisis. Oxford (2020). doi:10.21201/2020.5419
26. Guilhot N. Une vocation philanthropique. Actes Rech Sci Soc (2004) 151–
152:36. doi:10.3917/arss.151.0036
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
27. Tota AP. O imperialismo sedutor: a americanização do Brasil na época da 
Segunda Guerra. Sao Paulo: Companhia das Letras (2000).
28. Fishbein M, Bierring WL. A history of the American Medical Association 
1847 to 1947. Philadelphia: Saunders (1947).
29. Prescott SL, Logan AC. Planetary Health: From the Wellspring of Holistic 
Medicine to Personal and Public Health Imperative. Explore (2019) 15:98–
106. doi:10.1016/j.explore.2018.09.002
30. Redvers N, Yellow Bird M, Quinn D, Yunkaporta T, Arabena K. Molecular 
Decolonization: An Indigenous Microcosm Perspective of Planetary Health. 
Int J Environ Res Public Health (2020) 17:4586. 
doi:10.3390/ijerph17124586
31. Redvers N, Poelina A, Schultz C, Kobei DM, Githaiga C, Perdrisat M, Prince 
D, Blondin B. Indigenous Natural and First Law in Planetary Health. 
Challenges (2020) 11:29. doi:10.3390/challe11020029
32. Santos B. Vírus: tudo o que é sólido se desfaz no ar. Sul 21 (2020) 
Available at: https://www.sul21.com.br/opiniaopublica/2020/03/virus-tudo-
o-que-e-solido-se-desfaz-no-ar-por-boaventura-de-sousa-santos/ [Accessed 
November 27, 2020]
33. Santos B de S. “Para além do pensamento abissal: das linhas globais a 
uma ecologia de saberes,” in Epistemologias do Sul, eds. B. de S. Santos,  
M. P. Meneses (Sao Paulo: Coertez Editora), 31–83.
34. Solon P. Alternativas sistêmicas: Bem Viver, decrescimento, comuns, 
ecofeminismo, direitos da Mãe Terra e desglobalização. Sao Paulo: Elefante
Editora (2019).
35. Samaja J. Epistemología de la salud: reproducción social, subjetividad y 
transdisciplina. Buenos Aires: Lugar (2007).
36. Roudometof V. Theorizing glocalization. Eur J Soc Theory (2016) 19:391–
408. doi:10.1177/1368431015605443
37. Woldehanna S, Zimicki S. An expanded One Health model: Integrating 
social science and One Health to inform study of the human-animal 
interface. Soc Sci Med (2015) 129:87–95. 
doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2014.10.059
38. Wildlife Conservation Society. WCS. One World, One HealthTM. 2020
39. Wildlife Conservation Society. A Statement from the Wildlife Conservation 
Society. WCSNewsroom (2020) Available at: 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
https://newsroom.wcs.org/News-Releases/articleType/ArticleView/articleId/
14648/A-Statement-from-the-Wildlife-Conservation-Society.aspx [Accessed 
November 7, 2020]
40. Lainé N, Morand S. Linking humans, their animals, and the environment 
again : a decolonized and more-than-human approach to “One Health.” 
Parasite (2020) 27:55. doi:10.1051/parasite/2020055
41. WHO, OIE, FAO. Taking a Multisectoral, One Health Approach: A Tripartite 
Guide to Addressing Zoonotic Diseases in Countries. (2019).
42. Singer P. Speciesism and moral status. Metaphilosophy (2009) 40:567–581.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9973.2009.01608.x
43. Agamben G. The Open: Man and Animal. Stanford: Stanford University 
Press (2004).
44. Belcourt B-R. Animal Bodies, Colonial Subjects: (Re)Locating Animality in 
Decolonial Thought. Societies (2014) 5:1–11. doi:10.3390/soc5010001
45. Camacho J. Los criaderos de esclavos: medicina, cuerpos y sexualidad en 
los ingenios de Cuba. Hispanófila (2020) 188:3–18.
46. Smithers G. Slave Breeding: Sex, Violence, and Memory in African 
American History. Gainesville: University Press of Florida (2012).
47. Dumont H. Antropología y patología comparadas de los negros esclavos. 
Translated by Israel Castellanos. La Habana: Habana (1922).
48. World Health Organization. Milestones in Health Promotion: Statements 
from Global Conferences. Geneva: WHO Press (2009).
49. Haraway D. Staying with the trouble. Making kin in the Chtulucene. 
Durham and London: Duke University Press (2016).
50. Peggs K. Animals and Sociology. London: Palgrave Macmillan (2012).
51. Tuomivaara S. Animals in the Sociologies of Westermarck and Durkheim. 
London: Palgrave Macmillan (2019).
52. Pyyhtinen O. More-than-Human Sociology: A New Sociological Imagination. 
New York: Palgrave Macmillan (2016).
53. Sayes E. Actor-Network Theory and methodology: Just what does it mean 
to say that nonhumans have agency? Soc Stud Sci (2014) 44:134–149. 
doi:10.1177/0306312713511867
54. Kirksey SE, Helmreich S. The emergence of multispecies ethnography. Cult 
Anthropol (2010) 25:545–576. doi:10.1111/j.1548-1360.2010.01069.x
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
55.
Asdal K, Druglito T, Hinchliffe S. Humans, Animals and Biopolitics: The
more-than-human condition. , eds. K. Asdal, T. Druglito,  S. Hinchliffe New
York: Roudlege (2016).
56.
Wadiwel DJ. The war against animals. Leiden: Brill (2015).
57.
Taylor N, Twine R. The rise of critical animal studies: From the margins to
the centre. New York: Routledge (2014).
58.
Ryan T. Animals in Social Work: Why and How They Matter. New York:
Palgrave Macmillan (2014).
59.
Ryan T. Animals and Social Work: A Moral Introduction. New York: Palgrave
Macmillan (2011).
60.
Nussbaum M. Frontiers of Justice: Disability, Nationality and Species
Membership. Cambridge: Harvard University Press (2003).
61.
Blattner CE, Coulter K, Kymlicka W. Animal Labour: A New Frontier of
Interspecies Justice?. Oxford: Oxford University Press (2020).
62.
Celermajer D, Schlosberg D, Rickards L, Stewart-Harawira M, Thaler M,
Tschakert P, Verlie B, Winter C. Multispecies justice: theories, challenges,
and a research agenda for environmental politics. Env Polit (2020)1–22.
doi:10.1080/09644016.2020.1827608
63.
Johnson L, White TI, Bernstein MH, Peggs K. The Palgrave Handbook of
Practical Animal Ethics. London: Palgrave Macmillan (2018).
64.
Singer P. Animal Liberation: The Definite Classic of Animal Movement. New
York: Harper Perennial Modern Classics (2009).
65.
Hinchliffe S, Whatmore S. Living cities: Towards a politics of conviviality.
Sci Cult (Lond) (2006) 15:123–138. doi:10.1080/09505430600707988
66.
Bauer GR. Incorporating intersectionality theory into population health
research methodology: Challenges and the potential to advance health
equity. Soc Sci Med (2014) 110:10–17.
doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2014.03.022
67.
Prefeitura do Município de São Paulo. DECRETO No 59.685, DE 13 DE
AGOSTO DE 2020. (2020).
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.2053
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
This preprint was submitted under the following conditions: 
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
•
The authors declare that they are aware that they are solely responsible for the content of the 
preprint and that the deposit in SciELO Preprints does not mean any commitment on the part of 
SciELO, except its preservation and dissemination.
•
The authors declare that the research that originated the manuscript followed good ethical 
practices and that the necessary approvals from research ethics committees are described in the 
manuscript, when applicable.
•
The authors declare that the necessary Terms of Free and Informed Consent of participants or 
patients in the research were obtained and are described in the manuscript, when applicable.
•
The authors declare that the preparation of the manuscript followed the ethical norms of scientific 
communication.
•
The authors declare that the manuscript was not deposited and/or previously made available on 
another preprint server or published by a journal.
•
The submitting author declares that all authors responsible for preparing the manuscript agree with 
this deposit.
•
The submitting author declares that all authors' contributions are included on the manuscript.
•
The authors declare that if the manuscript is posted on the SciELO Preprints server, it will be 
available under a Creative Commons CC-BY license.
•
The deposited manuscript is in PDF format.
•
If the manuscript is being reviewed or being prepared for publishing but not yet published by a 
journal, the authors declare that they have received authorization from the journal to make this 
deposit.
