(Floristic survey of a Caatinga area of high biological importance in the Mesoregion of Paraíba backlands, Northeast Brazil). The Caatinga occupies an area of approximately 912,529 km², being one of the most distinct phytogeographic regions of the Brazilian territory. It has a vegetation that varies according to its distribution and relationship with the geography of each area. This study aimed to carry out a floristic survey of ABA farm, located in the municipality of Passagem, mesoregion of the Paraíba backlands. For four years, fortnightly botanical collections were carried out in all the plant's physiognomies on the farm, following a standard botanical protocol of floristic survey and herborization techniques. The results of this research brought up an important floristic list, consisting of 322 species from 194 genera belonging to 62 botanical families. Among these families, the ones with the higher number of species were Fabaceae (48 spp.), Euphorbiaceae (23 spp.), Convolvulaceae (21 spp.), Malvaceae (19 spp.) and Asteraceae (15 spp.). The habits were herbs (108 spp.), trees (59 spp.), subshrubs (56 spp.), shrubs (46 spp.), lianas (46 spp.), epyphytes and parasites (four spp.) In addition, 38 new species records were registered for the Paraíba State.
The Caatinga is located in the northeastern semiarid and occupies an area of approximately 912,529 km² (Silva et al. 2017), being one of the most distinct phytogeographic regions of the Brazilian territory. Its flora, in the Caatinga domain, has a representation of 5.022 species, with 2.307 species being found in the Paraíba State, according to a study presented in BFG (2021).
The Caatinga climate is semi-arid, forming vegetation mosaics, mostly deciduous, xerophilous and prickly plants, with poorly distributed rainfall and precipitation in a period of three to six months (IBGE 2004, Silva et al. 2017). In the Northern backland depression, rainfall is more concentrated in this ecoregion than in other parts of the Caatinga, varying from 500 to 800 mm (Veloso et al. 2002).
ABA Farm is located in an area which is considered by MMA (2002) as of high biological importance in the Caatinga, placed in the mountain complex also named Aba after the river that crosses this geologic mountain complex. The totality of its area presents many phytophysiognomies with mountains up to 800 m high and dense well-preserved tree-shrub caatinga associated to riparian forest, rupiculous flora and open fields. Among these areas riparian forests, open fields with the presence of exotic species and montane vegetation can be found (MMA 2002).
In the mesoregion of the Paraíba hinterland, floristic studies have been developed in the last five years and have improved knowledge about the state's flora, contributing to a better understanding of the flora and vegetation of Caatinga areas (Lucena et al. 2015, Torres et al. 2016, Brito et al. 2018, Costa et al. 2019, Fernando et al. 2021). The present study consists of a floristic survey of ABA farm, in the municipality of Passagem, Paraíba State, Northeast Brazil.
Study area - The municipality of Passagem is located in the mesoregion of the Paraiba hinterland, bordering with Quixaba and São Mamede by north, Taperoá e Cacimba by south, and Cacimba de Areia by east (IBGE 2019) (figure 1). The climate is semi-arid (Bsh), warm and dry, with an average annual temperature of 25ºC (Francisco 2015, IBGE 2019).
ABA farm is located at 4.6km from the urban area of Passagem, occupies an area of 350 ha of which 120 are legal reserve. Although most of the farm is located on a plain, the caatingas also reach the mountains, where the wavy to sgrongly wavy relief predominates, with elevations ranging from 300m to 810m, with emphasis on the Aba Mountains and Preacas (Beltrão et al. 2005).
The set of mountains which compose the farm (figure 2) shows a well-preserved vegetation, compared to vegetation at the lower altitudes of the area. The predominant vegetation is dense tree- shrubby, with some segments of open shrubby caatinga, riparian forests of a temporary river, rupiculous and aquatic vegetation. In the area where the farm is located there are many antrophic activities such as cattle and goat raising and their subsistence farming. Such activities do not expand to the mountainous areas, being limited to the surroundings of mountains or close to houses. Data collection - Floristic sampling was carried out from 2014 to 2017, period in which the botanical collections were carried out through exploratory and random walks in the study area, seeking to cover the larger possible area and all phytophysiognomies present. Fertile specimens were collected using the technique and method by preparing the botanical material according to parameters of usual taxonomy (Judd et al. 2009, IBGE 2012). Important features and information for the identification of the taxa were recorded in a field book, in addition to the photographic record, geographic coordinates, landscape and soil characterization.
The collected material was incorporated to HCSTR collection, acronym according to Thiers 2022, which is constantly updated. The specimens were identified with the help of specialized literature and examinations by specialists. The floristic list was ordered alphabetically by family and species and the circumscription of botanical families followed the proposal of "Angiosperm Phylogeny Group" (APG IV 2016). In order to check the writing of scientific names, the electronic databases of Flora do Brasil (BFG 2021) and Tropicos (http://www.tropicos.org) were consulted.
Three hundred and twenty-two species and 194 genera distributed in 62 botanical families were identified. Two families of Pteridophytes were found, with the predominant species being Selaginella convoluta (Arn.) Spring occurring in all phytophysiognomies of the farm, mainly in the riparian forest. Angiosperms were the group which prevailed in the study area, with 60 families registered, two of them being basal Angiosperms (Annonaceae and Aristolochiaceae) represented by the species Annona leptopetala (R.E.Fr.) H.Rainer and Aristolochia birostris Duch.
Eudicotyledons were predominant in the angiosperms group with 47 families, with Fabaceae (48 spp.), Euphorbiaceae (23 spp.), Convolvulaceae (21 spp.), Malvaceae (19 spp.) and Asteraceae (15 spp.) being the most representative ones. As for Monocotyledons, 11 families were registered, being represented maily by Poaceae (nine spp.), Bromeliaceae (six spp.), Commelinaceae (six spp.) and Cyperaceae (five spp.) which frequentely occurred in the study area.
Among the genera, the most represented were: Ipomoea L. with nine species and Euphorbia L., Oxalis L. and Tillandsia L. with five species each. Among life forms, the herbaceous was the predominant one (108 spp.), followed by trees (59 spp.), subshrubs (56 spp.), shrubs (46 spp.), lianas (46 spp.), epiphytes and parasitic forms (four spp.). All species are listed in Table 1.
Thirty-eight new species ocurrences were recorded for the Paraíba State (see * in table 1), one of these being new occurrences of genera: Eriope Kunth ex Benth. Three new occurrences for the Caatinga domain were also record: Helicteres andersonii Cristóbal (Malvaceae), Niedenzuella multiglandulosa (A. Juss.) WR Anderson (Malpighiaceae) and Oxalis latifolia Kunth (Oxalidaceae); and two new species described by (Monteiro et al 2018) and (Harley et al 2019) were recorded: Harpochilus paraibanus F.K.S. Monteiro, J.I.M Melo & E.M.P. Fernando and Mesosphaerum caatingense Harley & J.F.B. Pastore.
Eriope Bonpl. ex Benth. constitutes a new occurrence of the genus for the Paraíba State by the species Eriope macrostachya Mart. ex Benth. It is a shrub from the Lamiaceae family, which was found flowering between April and July and fruiting in August, at 810m heigh, the highest point of ABA farm. The species Niedenzuella multiglandulosa (A.Juss.) W.R. Anderson represents a new record for the Caatinga domain. It is a vine with yellow flowers and its populations were found in the riparian woods of the farm.
Two new species were described at the ABA Farm by Monteiro et al. (2018) and Harley et al. (2019); one of them from the Acanthaceae family, genus Harpochilus Nees, which is shrub species with a cream yellow inflorescence (Harpochilus paraibanus FKS Monteiro, JIM Melo & EMP Fernando), described for the Paraíba semiarid (Monteiro et al. 2018). The second species found was from the Lamiaceae family, genus Mesosphaerum P. Browne, a subshrub described for the Caatinga, with distribution in the States of Paraíba, Pernambuco and Rio Grande do Norte, Mesosphaerum caatingense Harley & J.F.B. Pastore (Harley et al. 2019).
The farm's riparian forest has a rich vegetation, with the most frequent species being Microdesmia rigida (Benth.) Sothers & Prance (Oiticica), Erythrina velutina Willd. (Mulungu), Tabebuia aurea (Silva Manso) Benth. & Hook.f. ex S.Moore (Craibeira), Lonchocarpus sericeus (Poir.) Kunth ex DC. (Ingazeira) and Sapium glandulosum (L.) Morong. (Leiteiro). Less frequently, the species Sebastiana riparia Schrad can be found near the water streams.
Some floristic studies were carried out in Caatinga areas in the interior of Paraíba (Santos et al. 2010, Lucena et al. 2015, Silva et al. 2015, Gadelha-Neto et al. 2018), which in terms of vegetation have a similarity of species with this study. As in previous studies, the most representative family in species number in the ABA Farm is Fabaceae, which reaffirms it as one of the most abundant plant families in the Caatinga.
There is a potential for preservation in the study area due to its rates of endemism, with 94 species for Brazil, with the species Trianthema portulacastrum L., Ruellia bahiensis (Nees) Morong e Harpochilus paraibanus F.K.S. Monteiro, J.I.M. Melo & E.M.P. Fernando corresponding to species exclusive to the Caatinga area (BFG 2021).
Furthermore, in this floristic survey, herbs are the predominant habit (108 spp.), which differs from other plant surveys (Silva et al. 2015, Gadelha-Neto et al. 2018) that have woody plants as the predominant habit. Several factors may indicate why this habit prevailed: the environment may be favorable, which favors the number of species or it may be due to the scarcity of collections focused on the herbaceous stratum in other studies with similar environments.
ABA farm is highly preserved area, with exotic species found only in the vicinity of the residences. It has a high expressiveness in species richness (322 species), besides presenting 38 new records. The area is classified by the MMA (Ministry of the Environment) as an Caatinga area prone to desertification, which makes it an area of high importance for conservation. The data from this research will support the implementation of an RPPN (Particular Reserve from the Natural Property) on the farm and its management plan.
To the landowner Magno Martins, for welcoming and contributing so much for the accomplishment of this research. The sectorial city hall of Universidade Federal de Campina Grande, for assistance in field trips. To professors Stephenson Abrantes and Erich Mariano and their research groups, for contributing so much for our success in the field. To all my graduation colleagues who helped me with field collections. To the Centro de Saúde e Tecnologia Rural, CSTR Rita Baltazar Herbarium at the Universidade Federal de Campina Grande, Campus Patos, Paraíba State.