Status: Preprint has not been submitted for publication
A critical reflection on the notions of family in migration studies
Igor José de Renó Machado
DOI: 10.1590/SciELOPreprints.1384
This preprint was submitted under the following conditions: 
The authors declare that they are aware that they are solely responsible for the content of the preprint and
that the deposit in SciELO Preprints does not mean any commitment on the part of SciELO, except its
preservation and dissemination.
The authors declare that the research that originated the manuscript followed good ethical practices and
that the necessary approvals from research ethics committees are described in the manuscript, when
applicable.
The authors declare that the necessary Terms of Free and Informed Consent of participants or patients in
the research were obtained and are described in the manuscript, when applicable.
The authors declare that the preparation of the manuscript followed the ethical norms of scientific
communication.
The authors declare that the manuscript was not deposited and/or previously made available on another
preprint server.
The submitting author declares that all authors responsible for preparing the manuscript agree with this
deposit.
The authors declare that in the event that this manuscript has previously been submitted to a journal and
being evaluated, they have received the journal's consent to make the deposit on the SciELO Preprints
server.
The submitting author declares that all authors' contributions are included on the manuscript.
The authors declare that if the manuscript is posted on the SciELO Preprints server, it will be available
under a Creative Commons CC-BY license.
The deposited manuscript is in PDF format.
If the manuscript is being reviewed and published by a journal, the authors declare that they have received
authorization from the journal to make this deposit.
Submitted on (YYYY-MM-DD): 2020-10-20
Posted on (YYYY-MM-DD): 2020-10-21
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
A critical reflection on the notions of family in
migration studies
Igor José de Renó Machado*
Orcid: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7811-2641
Declaro que não há conflito de interesses no manuscrito
Abstract
In this  paper I intend to discuss the issue of the relationship between the vague
notion of "family" and a more thorough discussion of "kinship", always based on
migratory contexts. Taking as example three cases studied within my research
group, I want to highlight a critical reflection on the position of the family in
migration studies. I intend to demonstrate how it is more common that the term
"family" operate as an extinguisher for the differences and as part of machineries
that would have difficulty being maintained in case the issue of kinship was to be
seriously taken.
Keywords: Family, kinship, migration
Resumo:
Nesse artigo pretendo discutir a questão da relação entre a noção vaga de “família” e
uma discussão mais cuidadosa sobre “parentesco”, sempre a partir de contextos
migratórios. Usando como exemplo 3 casos estudados no seio do meu grupo de
pesquisa, pretendo evidenciar uma reflexão crítica sobre o lugar da família nos
estudos  migratórios.  Pretendo  demonstrar  como  é  mais  comum  que  o  termo
“família” opere como um apagador de diferenças e como parte de maquinários que
teriam  dificuldade  em  se  manter  caso  considerassem  a  sério  a  questão  do
parentesco.
Palavras-chave: Família, parentesco, migração
*
Titular Professor at Federal University of São Carlos, Brazil (UFSCar).
1
Introduction
In this speech** I intend to discuss the issue of the relationship
between the vague notion of "family" and a more thorough discussion of
"kinship", always based on migratory contexts. Taking as example three cases
studied within my research group, I want to highlight a critical reflection on
the position of the family in migration studies. I intend to demonstrate how it
is more common that the term "family" operate as an extinguisher for the
differences  and  as  part  of machineries  that  would  have  difficulty  being
maintained in case the issue of kinship was to be seriously taken.
The first thing to do is to define what I call ‘the machinery’: I use the
term as a metaphor for the construction of theoretical and analytical models
of explanation (sociological, anthropological etc.). This metaphor helps me to
think the models as a set of machines, gears and devices organizing a general
machinery of thinking. Thus, we need to be aware and understand that the
machines are not things in themselves: they are tools we use to think about
the events and processes that interest us.
The machinery should be constantly changing, because reality never
responds exactly to our models. This leads to several possibilities, and a very
common one is the machinery stiffening: in this case, we force reality to fit
the models and the machinery is transformed from a tool to aid reflection
into something that hinders the understanding of the phenomena. Therefore,
machinery helps or hinders. And when it hinders, the result is that what it
was supposed to understand, ends up being concealed by the machinery.
The first symptom of stiff, rusty machinery is its tendency to become
a "thing." We could call this trend "objectification". An outstanding example
** Paper presented at IUAES 2016 INTER CONGRESS, Palace Hotel, Dubrovnik, Croacia, May
4-9 May, 2016.
2
for migration studies is the machinery of "ethnicity". Formerly used to think
critically about the adamant persistence of difference in contexts where
gradual "acculturation" was expected, replacing machinery that hindered the
understanding of phenomena (the machinery of acculturation), became itself
a "thing". People have ethnicity, ethnicity are objects as palpable as this table.
When the machinery turns into thing, it is very easy to confuse the process
with the machinery itself, producing new stiffening.
In the case of migration, we have several machines operating more
or less in an objectified manner. But this speech is not to criticize today's
most hegemonic models. The intention is to think the place of "family" in this
machinery, i.e., how the family is a gear in the machinery of explanations
based on networks and transnational theory. Being a gear, what do we leave
behind when family is only one piece in the machinery? And if, alternatively,
we think of a machinery based on kinship idea, what is revealed?
Theories and gears
In  the  theory  of  networks  (Portes  1995),  machinery  tries  to
overcome the economism of the rational action explanations for migration.
The point is to explain the displacement in terms of social relations and not
the cold calculation of average income differences. Here, social relationships
gain prominence and the family is a privileged place of social relations: the
family is a fundamental connection of networks, as a primary node of any
migratory network. But the family that emerges from this perspective is a
generic  and  universal  family,  disconnected  from  any  anthropological
discussion on kinship. It is assumed a generic family, that articulates any
migratory network in order to then understand the network and not the
structures  that  give  rise  to  it  (family,  friendship,  vicinality,  all  these
categories that could be inserted into what we mean by kinship).
3
In the context of transnational machinery (see Baubock and Faist
2010), the issues revolve around the way and the consequences of the lives of
migrants taking place in two or more countries simultaneously with the
political and sociological implications of a double engagement. A wide field
and  uneven  of  concerns,  it  is  true,  but  in  all  the  incarnations  of
transnationalism we see a centrality of the family as the privileged and
preferred driver link to this dual affiliation. But just like the theories of
networks, the family itself is just a gear in the machinery of linking between
two realities, between national policy and the rights of migrants, a link in the
narrative for the establishment of national powers, discrimination, and in the
very constitution of "world-system".
In both cases, what family is, it is contingent. It is contingent because
either it is irrelevant or family is presupposed as some underlying model
uncritically smuggled into the machinery. Obviously, the underlying model of
family is a Western model based on the nuclear family, on the consanguinity
and the importance of the biological. However, if we take the kinship itself as
a machinery to think migration, our concerns about what "family" is cannot
be contingent: they are central. The first thing to note is that family is a bad
name from the start: kinship relationships of the most varied order are left
behind when we talk about family. Family carries too much the Western
responsibility of being an effective gear. And even the definition of kinship
must be redesigned to escape the old traps of anthropological knowledge.
Based on these critizings from Schneider, a fresh impetus to the
studies  on  kinship  came  to  light,  concerned  to  accept  the  various  and
different relationships  as  kinship  relations:  friendship,  companionship,
shared  suffering  etc.  without  mentioning  the  appreciation  of  same-sex
relationships as kinship relations. We have an emphasis on the plasticity of
relations as plasticity of kinship. This little digression makes us think how
4
family is a very limited label for a large set of relationships that could be
defined as kinship.
When we think kinship as a machinery to understand migration, we
immediately  gain  what  the  current  models  conceal:  the  diversity  of
relationships that make up the thousands of migrants kinships. I want to
emphasize that the current models assume family as part of other links of
sociological attention, but a limited, stiffened and rusty idea of family: a
family which, for being so similarly thought, results in an obliteration of the
real diversity of migrants kinships. Let us now learn three examples that
illustrate something of the diversity of migrant kinships, so as to illustrate
how this difference is ignored by the existing machinery.
Two kinship relations or one?
Brazilian people  in Portugal  still  constitute  the  largest  group  of
migrants in the country. Despite the crisis, the return rates, or remigration,
are relatively small, indicating the entrenchment of the Brazilian community
in Portugal (Machado 2014). From two sets of fieldwork, I will expose some
internal differences to that Brazilian community which indicate the operation
of distinguished kinship modes, leading to different ways of relating to the
country.
In the first case (Machado 2009), a result from my PhD research
carried  out  almost  fifteen  years  ago,  we  had  a  specific  population  of
Brazilians: a set of immigrants mostly men, single, young and living around
jobs in the sector of restaurants. They formed a collective of people who
knew each other, visited, related and lived the Portuguese life in the city of
Porto, in 2000. The lives of these Brazilians were outlined by the Portuguese
kinship networks, basically the lower classes. They produced, thus, a specific
reality of life, marked by the integration into the labor market and by the
5
inclusion into Portuguese kinship networks. From this Brazilian universe in
Porto,  I  want  to  highlight  something  interesting  in  this  speech:  the
relationship they constituted with Brazil. For a number of factors that are not
to be explained here, clearly allied to the inclusion into Portuguese kinship
networks, these immigrants did not think about, and did not visualized in
their horizons, the return to Brazil. Coming to Brazil was important, but only
as  a  way  to  "recharge"  something  like  a  Brazilianness  index  that  had
importance in the internal relations of these Brazilian in the city of Porto.
In a way, the decision of not returning was deeply connected to the
insertion into the Portuguese kinship networks, as well as much of the
collective  life  of  these  Brazilians  had  to  do  with  the  same  networks:
girlfriends,  employers,  customers.  What  I  want  to  highlight  is  that  this
insertion permanently modulated the experience of these Brazilians in the
city of Port.
In  the  other  case  I  intend  to  briefly  explore,  we  look  at  other
Brazilian immigrants in Portugal, but now from a different point of view:
from the family members who remain in Brazil, more specifically in the city
of Governador Valadares. For these migrants, the issue was different: they
lived the experience in Portugal as "target migrants", with specific goals to
amass during migration. A specific amount for building their homes and
setting  up  a  business  that  would  guarantee  the  family's  livelihood.  The
experience of these immigrants is the result of an obvious kinship order in
Governador Valadares. As I have previously demonstrated elsewhere, this
kinship order was based on the desire of constituting standalone family units
which simultaneously concentrate relationship bundles.
The most common was the migration of married men, leaving their
families  in  Brazil,  waiting  for  their  return  (although  several  other
configurations  were  possible).  But  they  all  aimed  at  coming  back  and
reestablish the relations in Valadares. This trip organized around kinship
6
processes in Valadares had consequences in the way Brazilians lived their
lives in Portugal. Some of the consequences that we can highlight are: a
tendency to escape the maximum from any public exhibition, longer working
hours  seeking  to  accumulate  more  money,  predominant  living  among
Valadares migrants and a greater inclination to join Brazilian Protestant
religious communities in Portugal.
The experience of these people from Valadares in Portugal is, in a
sense, a reverse of Brazilian life in Porto: if the latter were keen to show
themselves as Brazilian to get the opportunity in the labor market that
valued such Brazilianness, the former try to conceal any Brazilianness, as a
way to not jeopardize the original migration plans.
We can see how Brazilian migrations in Portugal produce completely
distinct realities and the kinship machinery causes this difference to emerge,
which  would  probably  be  less  important  with  other  machinery.  Both
transnationalism and the theory of networks (or variations of sociology of
migrations) would tend to look more at other processes rather than look at
kinship orders producing such different realities, to an extent that we can say
they  are  radically  different.  They  are  kinship  orders  producing  very
dissonant realities.
Okinawans and Japanese in transit
Nadia  Kubota  (2014)  shows  us  how  the  relationship  between
immigrants from Okinawa and from "traditional" Japan has always been
tense in Campo Grande (MS/ Brazil). Living together was difficult, and the
Second  World War marked  a profound rupture between "defeatist" and
"victorist", between those who believed in Japan's defeat and those who did
not - conflict known for having generated Shindo Renmei, a small victorist
army aiming at punishing the “defeatist”. In Campo Grande, just like in
7
several  other  places  of  Japanese/Okinawan  migration,  there  has  been a
division between Okinawans/ “defeatist” and Japanese/ “victorist”.
This division gave rise to two distinct associations, to lives lived in
parallel. In a large notarial survey, Kubota was able to identify that marriage
rates between Okinawans and Japanese in Campo Grande have always been
minimal, lower than marriage rates between Okinawans and Brazilian and
Japanese and Brazilian. Ethnography shows a systematic process of non-
relationship  between Okinawans and Japanese (Naichi), identified in the
refusal to make relatives, to produce kinship. The cases of marriage between
Japanese and Okinawan are extremely rare. We can see here the kinship as a
certain political expression of colonial relations between Japan and Okinawa.
And this expression in Brazil persisted almost throughout the twentieth
century.
But something happened from the end of the twentieth century: the
migration of those Naichis and Okinawans to Japan (not to Okinawa, in
Japan). In these new streams, the flowing of this entire Nikkei population to
Japan (either descending from Naichis or Okinawans, or spouses with no
bloodline) put them before a society resistant to the difference, experiencing
intense racism and prejudice. This experience of painful processes eventually
diminished (or mitigated) the internal differences between Okinawans and
Naichis, constituting Brazilian communities in Japan that crossed the dividing
lines in Brazil.
In  Japan,  we  have  indications  of  kinship  blending  what  was
separated in Brazil. Thus, we see two distinct forms of kinship organizations,
having the migration itself as the engine of change. New ways of life in Japan
produced new forms of kinship. Therefore, a family of Okinawan parentage in
Brazil  is  not  the  same  as  it  is  in  Japan  today.  Migration  produced
distinguished kinship systems, which now radically affect the lives of both
the people who have gone to Japan, and those who stayed, as Kubota states:
8
those who stay begin to reorganize their set of relations based more on the
neighborhood that on the blood. Members of families emptied by emigration
tend to join and form new families. We are, therefore, talking about a third
kinship system that seems to still retain something of the division between
Okinawans and Japanese.
Final considerations
What do these three examples tell us about family and kinship in a
migratory context? What do they say about the prevailing machinery today?
What is, specifically, my point in this speech? Let's start by the second
question: about the dominant machinery. The intention here is not to criticize
or say they are outdated, or anything to this effect. The purpose is to expose
such working machinery and demonstrate that they operate with relatively
emptied  notions  of  family,  from  general  considerations  and  different
intentions. None of them wants to explain the family itself, but other things
(from the nation-state to a group of migrant social relations). This means
that, in order to achieve their explanatory goals and, thus, shed light on
certain issues, this machinery leaves the family gear in the gloom. 
Distinctions between the two Brazilian kinships in Portugal and the
three kinships generated by the Okinawan experience in Brazil and Japan
would simply be contingent to other analytical intentions. They would not
appear as the differences they produce on a daily basis. And here, I answer
the question about my point in this speech: a machinery centered on kinship
allows me to bring out these so intense and meaningful differences. This way,
I place an anthropological conception of kinship in favor of highlighting the
differences created by the various kinships migrants.
And what these examples tell us about the family and the migrant
kinship is ultimately something we should stand out as central to a number of
9
migrant experiences: the set of relationships involving more affective, moral
and financial investment are the relations of kinship that are not obvious,
though.  These  do  not  follow  any  model:  the  same  nationality  produces
different kinships in Portugal, depending on where you invest emotionally:
either in Portuguese networks or in the maintenance of the home networks;
the same historical process, such as the migration of Okinawans to Brazil,
followed by the migration of their descendants to Japan, more than half a
century  later,  generated  three  distinct  kinship  systems  that  have  been
changing and significantly affecting the life experience of these people. We,
therefore, restate an ethnographic approach to give any meaning to the
different notions of family that migration entails, produces and transforms
throughout its course.
References
BAUBÖCK,  Rainer;  FAIST,  Thomas  (Ed.).
 Diaspora  and
transnationalism: concepts, theories and methods. Amsterdam University
Press, 2010.
CARSTEN, Janet. After kinship. Cambridge University Press, 2004.
DEZEM, Rogério, and  Maria Luiza  Tucci Carneiro.  Shindô-renmei:
terrorismo e repressão. Arquivo do Estado, Imprensa Oficial, 2000.
KEBBE,  Victor  Hugo.  Quando  os  mortos  chamam  -  Parentesco,
Imigração e Religião vistos nas práticas da Yuta no Brasil. Projeto de pós-
doutorado, FAPESP, São Paulo, 2013.
KUBOTA, Nádia. Okinawanos e não-okinawanos em Campo Grande:
Relações de Parentesco e Famílias. Qualificação de doutorado, UFSCar, São
Carlos, 2014.
10
MACHADO, I. J. R.  Cárcere Público: Processos de exotização entre
brasileiros no Porto. 1. ed. Lisboa: Imprensa de Ciências Sociais, 2009. v. 1.
256p
MACHADO, I. J. R. O ponto de vista das famílias: etnografia sobre os
emigrantes internacionais valadarenses (Brasil). Revista Migrações, v. 05, p.
155-168, 2009. 
MACHADO, I. J. R. Reordenações da Casa no contexto migratório de
Governador Valadares, Brasil.. Etnográfica (Lisboa), v. 14, p. 5-26, 2010.
MACHADO, I. J. R. ; ALMEIDA, Alexandra Gomes de ; REIS, Ellen
Saraiva  .  Algumas  características  do  fluxo  migratório  de  brasileiros  de
Governador Valadares para Portugal. Antropológicas (Porto), v. 11, p. 111-
126, 2009.
MACHADO, I. J. R. ; REIS, Ellen Saraiva . Algumas conclusões acerca
do fluxo de valadarenses para Portugal. Teoria & Pesquisa, v. 16, p. 153-166,
2007.
MACHADO, I. J. R. O futuro do passado: imigrantes brasileiros em
portugal e diferentes entrelaçamentos. In REMHU, nª 44, 2014 (no prelo).
MACHADO, I. J. R. Imigração em Portugal. Estudos Avançados, v. 20,
p. 119-135, 2006.
MACHADO,  I.  J.  R.  Interação  das  fronteiras  e  o  ponto  de  vista
etnográfico:  dinâmicas  migratórias  recentes  em  Governador  Valadares.
Horizontes Antropológicos, v. 15, p. 167-187, 2009b.
PORTES, Alejandro (1995b), “Economic sociology and the sociology
of immigration: a conceptual overview”, in A. Portes (Ed.), The Economic
Sociology  of  Immigration.  Essays  on  Networks,  Ethnicity  and
Entrepreneurship, Nova Iorque, Russel Sage Foundation, pp. 1-41
SAHLINS, Marshall. What Kinship is-and is Not. University of Chicago
Press, 2013.
11
SAITO, Hiroshi; WILLEMS, Emílio. Shindo Renmei–um problema de
aculturação. Revista de Sociologia, 1947.
SCHNEIDER,  David  M.  American  kinship:  A  cultural  account.
University of Chicago Press, 1980.
SCHNEIDER,  David  Murray.  A  Critique  of  the  Study  of  Kinship.
University of Michigan Press, 1984.
12
