The emergence of severe acute respiratory coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2) and its association with severe pneumonia and deaths 
has exposed gaps in the health systems of several countries worldwide. 
Although the necessary focus has been to care for hospitalized patients, 
the strengthening of Primary Health Care (PHC) actions is necessary. 
PHC is the gateway to the health system in several countries, including 
Brazil and it plays a role in preventing, protecting, promoting, and treating 
individuals and communities. Brazil, like other countries, has faced the 
SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. As Brazil has a universal and decentralized 
health system, in which PHC has been the model of health re-organizing 
the health system; here we reflected the importance of strengthening PHC 
in Brazil in the times of coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic.

On February 26, 2020, 57 days after the Chinese government notified 
the World Health Organization (WHO) of an outbreak of pneumonia in 
Wuhan, capital of Hubei,1 the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 
2 (SARS-CoV-2) was confirmed by the first time in Brazilian territory and, 
since then, the virus that causes coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19) has been 
spreading throughout the country.2 Until April 15, 2020, when we wrote 
this paper, there are already 28,320 confirmed cases (an increase of 3,058 in 
24 hours) and 1,736 deaths (an increase of 204 deaths in 24 hours).2 Here 
we reflected the importance of strengthening PHC in Brazil in the times 
of coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic.

In Brazil, the Unified Health System (SUS), established in the 1980s for 
universal and whole care, has the fundamental mission of guaranteeing 
care for more than 210 million Brazilians and thousands of foreigners 
residing or passing through the country.3 In face of COVID-19, SUS assumes 
a fundamental role in the containment of the disease in Brazil, using a 
wide network of hospitals, laboratories, research centers, health units, 
blood bank and blood products, private network linked to institutions 
support, and public universities.

To prevent or at least delay the collapse of the 
health system - already observed in other countries 
- a set of measures were adopted by the Brazilian 
government. Brazil hired more than 200 beds of 
intensive care units (ICU) and more than 5,800 
doctors for the Mais Médicos (More Doctors) Program 
in Brazil”, especially to work in large urban centers 
where high population density is observed. The 
government granted US$ 2 billion for private plans to 
invest in infrastructure, acquisition, and distribution 
of 10 million rapid tests for SARS-CoV-2 infection 
in the states and municipalities. Additionally, 
US$ 200 million were destinated for the acquisition 
of respirators, US$ 10 million for scientific studies 
and transferred US$ 0.9 billion from the Insurance 
for Traffic Accidents fund to SUS (4). Despite such 
measures, the health system has failed to guarantee 
comprehensive assistance to citizens and the risk 
of collapse has become increasingly evident and 
predictable.

With all the concern focused on the hospital 
network, one component of the system has been 
overlooked: Primary Health Care (PHC). In the 
plan to combat COVID-19 epidemic in Brazil, there 
is no explicit and/or clearly mention of investment 
and/or strengthening of this component of the health 
system.4 We advocate that failing to appreciate the 
importance of PHC in this pandemic moment can 
be a mistake in favor of the rapid collapse of the 
health system in the face of the increase in cases of 
COVID-19 in the country.

In recent years, this is the component of SUS that has 
been weakened the most 5, with the untying of Cuban 
doctors who worked in areas of high vulnerability 
in Brazil, the end of the multi-professional model in 
Family Health care with the extinction of the financial 
incentive to the Center for Support to Family Health 
(NASF, in Portuguese), changes in PHC financing 
and organization with the new National Policy for 
Primary Health Care in 2017 and changes in the 
design and execution of primary health incentive 
programs, such as the Quality and Care Improvement 
Program (PMAQ, in Portuguese).

There are reasons to believe that enhancing PHC 
in this pandemic moment can be a potent alternative. 
The Family Health Strategy (ESF), initially created as 
the Family Health Program (PSF) in the early 1990s, 
has been the main instrument for reorienting Brazilian 
healthcare practice and consolidating PHC in Brazil.6 
In 1998, Brazil had 2,054 family health teams; in 2017, 
there were already 41,619, covering 70% of the Brazilian 
population (about 143 million people).7 The Mais 
Médicos (More Doctors) Program was responsible 
for an accelerated growth in family health coverage 
between 2014 and 2017, whose coverage went from 
66.9% to 70.0%. The PHC workforce involved more 
than 36,000 health posts, 63,000 doctors, 70,000 nurses, 
263,000 community health workers and 26,000 oral 
health teams.8

With a resolution rate of around 85% of the 
population’s basic health needs, PHC was responsible, 
between the years 2001 and 2016, for reducing 45% 
of hospitalizations for conditions sensitive to this 
level of care (76% in hospitalizations for asthma, 
66.5% in hospitalizations for gastroenteritis and 57.3% 
of hospitalizations for cardio and cerebrovascular 
diseases, for example).7 In municipalities with Mais 
Médicos (More Doctors) program, the reduction 
in these admissions was 4% greater than in those 
without the program.9

Immunization is also an essential attribute of 
PHC. The increase in vaccination coverage results 
in a reduction in hospitalization due to preventable 
diseases, such as whooping cough, diphtheria, 
H. influenzae and measles. Currently, there are 
more than 36,000 vaccine rooms and 45 types of 
immunological, including vaccines, serum and 
immunoglobulins.10 SUS is responsible for 95% of 
vaccine doses applied in the country.10 Because of the 
pandemic, Brazil decided to anticipate, in one month, 
the beginning of vaccination against Influenza, a 
seasonal respiratory disease that increases the number 
of hospitalizations, which may represent an additional 
burden on the health system. The campaign aims to 
immunize at least 90% of the target population, made 
up of 67.6 million individuals.

Established in 2011 by the Brazilian Ministry of 
Health, the Telehealth program (Programa Telessaúde, 
in Portuguese) has been an additional tool used by health 
professionals and managers to combat COVID-19. By 
means of bidirectional telecommunication instruments, 
health professionals and managers can send their 
doubts about clinical management, preventive actions 
or even issues related to the work process; and a 
qualified professional sends the requesting professional 
information based on the current scientific evidence.11 
This has allowed to qualify the care provided in the 
PHC and to reduce unnecessary referrals of users to 
more specialized levels.

A strong primary care may reduce unnecessary 
admissions, relieving the hospital system and 
expanding the availability of beds for patients 
with COVID-19 and can save financial resources 
for the health system itself and guarantee its 
sustainability.12 Between 2010 and 2016, more than 
23,000 hospitalizations for conditions sensitive to 
primary care were avoided, generating savings of 
US$ 6.1 million to public coffers in Brazil.8

The important role that PHC has in facing the 
COVID-19 pandemic is notorious. Governments should 
spare no effort to strengthen this component of the 
system, at risk of worsening the health crisis, rapid 
collapse of the health system and an increase in the 
number of deaths from both COVID-1913 and other 
conditions sensitive to changes in PHC, including 
diarrheal disease, respiratory and cardiovascular 
diseases. Thus, PHC represents a strategic resource in the 
limited arsenal of tools available to combat COVID-19.
