Status: Preprint has not been submitted for publication
PANORAMA OF ORTHODONTICS AFTER COVID-19: A CRITICAL
LITERATURE REVIEW
Andressa Cavalcanti Pires, Smyrna Luiza  Ximenes de Souza, Alessandro Leite Cavalcanti
DOI: 10.1590/SciELOPreprints.1153
This preprint was submitted under the following conditions: 
The authors declare that they are aware that they are solely responsible for the content of the preprint and
that the deposit in SciELO Preprints does not mean any commitment on the part of SciELO, except its
preservation and dissemination.
The authors declare that the research that originated the manuscript followed good ethical practices and
that the necessary approvals from research ethics committees are described in the manuscript, when
applicable.
The authors declare that the necessary Terms of Free and Informed Consent of participants or patients in
the research were obtained and are described in the manuscript, when applicable.
The authors declare that the preparation of the manuscript followed the ethical norms of scientific
communication.
The authors declare that the manuscript was not deposited and/or previously made available on another
preprint server.
The submitting author declares that all authors responsible for preparing the manuscript agree with this
deposit.
The authors declare that in the event that this manuscript has previously been submitted to a journal and
being evaluated, they have received the journal's consent to make the deposit on the SciELO Preprints
server.
The submitting author declares that all authors' contributions are included on the manuscript.
The authors declare that if the manuscript is posted on the SciELO Preprints server, it will be available
under a Creative Commons CC-BY license.
The deposited manuscript is in PDF format.
If the manuscript is being reviewed and published by a journal, the authors declare that they have received
authorization from the journal to make this deposit.
Submitted on (YYYY-MM-DD): 2020-08-28
Posted on (YYYY-MM-DD): 2020-09-01
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
PANORAMA OF ORTHODONTICS AFTER COVID-19: A CRITICAL LITERATURE 
REVIEW 
Panorama of Orthodontics after COVID-19 
Andressa Cavalcanti Pires¹, Smyrna Luiza Ximenes de Souza¹, Alessandro Leite 
Cavalcanti¹ 
 
¹ Department of Dentistry, State University of Paraíba, R. Baraúnas, 351 -Universitário, 
58429-500, Campina Grande, Paraíba, Brazil. 
 
Corresponding    Author: Andressa Cavalcanti Pires. R. Baraúnas, 351 -Universitário, 
58429-500, Campina Grande –PB. 
 
Email addresses: andressa_cavalcanti@hotmail.com, smyrnasouza@hotmail.com,  
alessandrouepb@gmail.com. 
 
ACP e SLXS wrote the manuscript. ALC conceived the study idea and wrote the 
manuscript. 
 
ORCID Andressa Pires: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4476-3547 
ORCID Smyrna Souza: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2271-9916 
ORCID Alessandro Cavalcanti: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3572-3332 
 
We declare that all authors of this manuscript have made substantial contributions to 
the  conception  of  the paper,  the  acquisition,  analysis  and  interpretation  of  data  
and the writing of the manuscript. All approved the submitted version. 
 
We further declare that there are no conflicts of interest between the authors of this 
manuscript, with companies that may eventually benefit from the results of the study. 
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT: 
A new Coronavirus (2019-nCov, renamed SARS-CoV-2) was identified in the Chinese 
city of Wuhan in late 2019, and was declared a pandemic by the World Health 
Organization, on March 11, 2020. As it is a highly infectious disease, major regional 
and national changes have been made, social isolation was recommended, which led 
to the interruption of various services, including elective dental treatments. This review 
aimed to identify the changes that occurred in the post-COVID-19 orthodontic practice 
scenario. For such, a search was made for articles published in the bibliographic bases 
PubMed, Scopus and SciELO, using the keywords “Orthodontics” and “Covid-19”. 
From the eligibility criteria, 11 articles were selected for analysis. It was found that 
social isolation impacted the scheduling of orthodontic appointments and patient’s 
anxiety about the duration of treatments. The use of teleodontology proved to be an 
ally in screening and in patient care. Preventive infection control must be adopted for 
safe orthodontic practice. 
Key-words: Coronavirus infections. Orthodontics. Dental practice. Dentistry. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Due to the identification of a high number of cases involving a new Coronavirus 
in the Chinese city of Wuhan [1] (2019-nCov, renamed SARS-CoV-2) [2,3], the World 
Health Organization (WHO) declared a pandemic on March 11, 2020 [4]. In an attempt 
to contain the spread of the highly contagious COVID-19, major regional and national 
changes have been made, leaving only essential services open [5].  
 
It was recommended to suspend elective dental treatments except for 
emergencies, to help in social isolation measures, reduce the consumption of 
individual protective equipment (IPE), reduce aerosol production and the consequent 
risk of infection [6]. 
 
With the postponement of orthodontic consultations, the concern with the 
prolongation of the treatment arose among patients [7], as well as anxiety about 
scheduling the next visit to the orthodontist [8], as social isolation became a regulation 
adopted by several countries [9]. 
 
Without the possibility of face-to-face consultations, professionals and patients 
undergoing orthodontic treatment had the opportunity to use technology to offer and 
receive virtual assistance, using photo, video or video-call applications, thus allowing 
the orthodontist to evaluate the need to be seen at the office [5,6]. These technological 
communication tools, aside from keeping the patient-professional relationship active, 
decrease anxiety, since there is no risk of contamination, contrary to what happens 
during face-to-face care [8]. 
 
In order for a full return to orthodontic practice to happen, effective infection 
control measures must be routinely adopted by all the dental team members, such as 
the correct washing of hands, disinfection of all surfaces in the dental office, and the 
complete understanding and acceptance of protocols recommended by WHO [7].  
 
Considering the importance of information about the current situation, this study 
aimed to identify the changes that occurred in the post-COVID-19 orthodontic practice 
scenario. 
 
METHODOLOGY 
 
 
Documentary technique based on pre-existing literature on the subject was 
used to carry out this bibliographic review. The research included the search for articles 
published in the bibliographic databases PubMed, Scopus and SciELO. As keywords, 
the terms “Orhodontics” and “Covid-19” were used in both Portuguese and in English. 
Both terminologies were extracted from the Health Sciences Descriptors (DeCS) of the 
Latin American and Caribbean Center on Health Sciences on Health Sciences 
Information (BIREME). 
 
As eligibility criteria, articles published up to August 2020, written in English and 
Portuguese, which had the full text available within the theme addressed, were 
included. Articles involving the theme of COVID-19 in Dentistry but not the 
Orthodontics specialty, letters to the Editor and those studies carried out on animals 
(in vivo) were excluded. 
 
RESULTS 
 
 
Forty-seven articles were found, 38 in the PubMed database, 8 in the Scopus 
database, and 1 in SciELO. Of these, 12 that were duplicated were excluded. The 
remaining 35 articles were read by two independent reviewers, of which 11 were 
selected for analysis according to the inclusion criteria, as can be seen in Figure 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Flowchart of identification and selection of articles for review.  
Source: Authors. 
 
Records identified through electronic 
database searching:  
PUBMED (n=38) 
SCOPUS (n=8) 
SCIELO (n=1) 
 
 
 
 
24 records excluded after full 
reading: 
 
n=11 
Eligibility criteria: 
 
Articles published up to August 
2020. 
 
Articles written in English and 
Portuguese. 
 
Full text available within the theme 
addressed. 
 
Articles involving the theme of 
COVID-19 in Dentistry but not the 
Orthodontics specialty, letters to 
the Editor and those studies 
carried out on animals (in vivo) 
were excluded. 
Records duplicates removed 
between databases (n = 12) 
Included 
Eligibility 
Screening 
Identification 
 
Studies included in review (n = 11) 
 
Chart 1 shows the author, the year and country of the study, the objectives, the 
main results, and the conclusions of the 11 selected articles. Data found served as a 
compass for discussing the results of this article. 
Chart 1: Description of works involving the theme of Orthodontics and COVID-19. 
Autor 
País 
Objetivos 
Resultados Principais 
Conclusões 
Sunjay 
Suri et al. 
[5] 
Canada 
To provide a comprehensive 
summary of the implications of 
SARS-CoV-2 infection and 
COVID-19 on orthodontic 
treatment, contingency 
management, and provision of 
emergency orthodontic 
treatment. 
Human-to-human transmission of SARS-
CoV-2 occurs predominantly through the 
respiratory tract via droplets, secretions, 
and or direct contact, where the virus 
enters the mucous membrane of the 
mouth, nose, and eyes. The virus can 
remain stable for days on plastic and 
stainless steel. Most infected persons 
experience a mild form of disease, but 
those with advanced age or underlying 
comorbidities may suffer severe 
respiratory and multiorgan complications. 
During the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic, 
elective orthodontic treatment should be 
suspended and resumed only when permitted by 
federal, provincial, and local health regulatory 
authorities. Emergency orthodontic treatment can 
be provided by following a contingency plan 
founded on effective communication and triage. 
Treatment advice should be delivered remotely 
first when possible, and where necessary, in-
person treatment can be performed in a well-
prepared operatory following the necessary 
precautions and infection prevention and control 
protocol. 
Martina et 
al. [6]  
Italy 
To investigate if dentists are 
anxious about returning to their 
daily activities, and what the 
perception of the risk is for 
dentists and orthodontists 
regarding orthodontic 
procedures. 
 
 
A total of 349 dentists, including 183 
orthodontists, completed the survey. 
Returning to their daily work activity was 
a source of anxiety for 192 participants 
and this was associated with the level of 
distress. 67.6% of the orthodontists 
thought thar they would increase the 
number of working hours during the 
week. 
Italian dentists were mostly scared to return to 
their daily activities because they considered their 
jobs a high risk to them and their families. 
Dentists with an exclusive/prevailing orthodontic 
activity were forced to increase their working day 
during the week. 
Peloso et 
al. [7]  
Brazil 
To evaluate the impact of 
quarantine resulting from the 
COVID-19 pandemic on dental 
appointments and patients’ 
Five hundred ninety five patients 
answered the questionnaire. Most 
patients reported they were receiving 
orthodontic treatment and would attend 
The quarantine recommended due to the COVID-
19 pandemic was shown to have an impact on 
dental appointments and the anxiety levels of 
patients, since there was a significant association 
positions and concerns 
regarding their ongoing dental 
treatment.  
to a dental appointment; meanwhile, 
those patients not receiving treatment 
would not attend or would visit only in the 
case of an emergency. Males reported to 
be calmer than females, who were more 
anxious and afraid; as such, males 
reported more willing to go a dental 
appointment while, in general, females 
were not worried about how quarantine 
could affect dental treatment. Orthodontic 
patients were concerned about delay in 
treatment. 
between patients’ feelings and their willingness to 
attend a dental appointment. Overall, patients 
undergoing dental treatment and orthodontics 
were more willing to attend an appointment and 
were more concerned about an increase in 
treatment duration. 
Cotrin et 
al. [8] 
Brazil 
To evaluate the impact of the 
coronavirus pandemic and the 
quarantine in orthodontic 
appointments, and patient’s 
anxiety and concerns about their 
ongoing orthodontic treatment. 
 
 
The questionnaire was answered by 354 
patients with mean age of 35.49 years. 
Most patients are respecting the 
quarantine, more than 40% related to be 
calm and afraid or anxious. The level of 
anxiety was greater for females than 
males. There was significant association 
of the level of anxiety and the willingness 
to attend an appointment. The greatest 
concern of patients was delay in the end 
of treatment. 
The quarantine and coronavirus pandemic 
showed to have impact on orthodontic 
appointments and patients’ anxiety. Patients 
willing to attend an orthodontic appointment 
presented significantly lower level of anxiety than 
patients that would not go or would go only in 
urgency/emergency. Females were more anxious 
than males about coronavirus pandemic, 
quarantine and impact on their orthodontic 
treatments. Delay in treatment was the greatest 
concern of patients undergoing orthodontic 
treatment. 
Xiong et 
al. [9]  
China 
To evaluate the mental distress 
of orthodontic patients and to 
investigate the level of their 
anxiety on treatment duration 
and outcome during the early 
stage of the pandemic. 
Questionnaires were collected from 458 
patients. The prevalence of mental 
distress was 38%. Higher odds ratios 
were associated with female participants, 
missed appointments and Hubei 
residence. Types of orthodontic 
appliance were associated with anxiety 
Over one third of orthodontic patients experienced 
mental distress during the pandemic. Multiple 
factors affected the level of anxiety of orthodontic 
patients, such as the typo of orthodontic 
appliance, interval from the last dental visit, 
manner of communication with the orthodontist, 
and the localities of the pandemic progression. 
of prolonged treatment duration. The 
manner of communication with patients 
regarding the postponement of 
appointments was associated with 
patients’ concern of prolonged treatment 
duration. Frequency of contact from 
dentists was associated with patients’ 
independence. 
Caprioglio 
et al. [10]  
United 
States of 
America 
To summarize guidelines on the 
management of orthodontic 
patients during COVID-19 
emergency focusing on virtual 
assistance devices and 
classification of emergencies. 
The first step should always be virtual 
assistance, and WhatsApp may be 
considered a good tool to do that. The 
virtual assistance might be performed by 
using photos, videos or video call. 
Orthodontic emergencies is classified on 
the basis of the type of the appliance 
used by the patient: removable or fixed 
appliance. 
 
A good method to manage emergencies, 
reassure, and follow patients remotely, while they 
are in their home, is via WhatsApp web. 
At the moment, it is necessary to manage in the 
office only the real cases of urgencies that cannot 
be resolved remotely by the patient, following the 
guidelines dictated by the WHO and local 
authorities. 
Eliades e 
Koletsi 
[11] 
Switzerla
nd  
To list the sources of aerosol 
production during orthodontic 
standard procedure, analyze the 
constituent components of 
aerosol and their dependency 
on modes of grinding, the 
presence of water an type of 
bur, and suggest a method to 
minimize the quantity and 
detrimental characteristics of the 
particles comprising the solid 
matter of aerosol. 
Minimization of water-spray syringe 
utilization for rising is anticipated on 
bonding related procedures. Before any 
procedure, must be done mouth rinse 
with CHX 0.2% in attempt to reduce the 
load of aerosolized pathogens. Water 
cooling rotary instruments might not be 
the treatment of choice, whereas hand-
instruments for remnant removal might 
represent better and effective strategy.  
 
 
Wide and consistent adoption of occupational 
measures to control generation of aerosol in 
orthodontic practice should be universal, with 
microbiologic considerations, particulate matter 
production as well as toxicity related perspectives 
being on the spot, even more within the course of 
a pandemic. Realistic management in practice 
should focus on bonding and debonding 
strategies. In-office measures of self-protection 
should never be neglected. 
 
Guo et al. 
[12] 
China 
and 
United 
States of 
America 
To summarize the preventive 
strategies for control of SARS-
CoV-2 transmission to protect 
both staff and patients during 
the orthodontic practice. 
 
In orthodontic practice, there may be 
transmission when bonding and 
removing brackets, moldings, oral 
scanning, photographs, wire changes, 
and placement of mini implants. 
Orthodontic instruments and materials 
that are not individually packaged can be 
a risk of contamination. High speed use 
should be avoided in order not to 
generate aerosols. During the pandemic 
period, emergency procedures are 
recommended. 
All procedures related to the orthodontic practice 
should be strictly performed with preventive 
measures to control the potential transmission of 
SARS-CoV-2. The control strategies include, but 
are not limited to, pre-examination and triage of 
patients, hand hygiene, personal protective 
measures, mouth rinse, reducing the use of high-
speed handpieces while increasing the use of 
high-volume saliva ejectors during bracket or 
attachment bonding and removal, disinfection 
during archwire changing or bending and 
removable appliance adjustment, disinfection of 
dental settings between patients, instructions to 
patients, management of reusable items and 
medical wastes, air and environment disinfection, 
and digital patient follow-up. 
Maspero 
et al. [13]  
Italy 
To reduce in-office 
appointments by providing an 
overview of the technologies 
available and their reliability in 
the long-distance monitoring of 
patients (teledentistry). 
 
 
Available Technologies that can be used 
in Teleorthodontics are: high-speed 
Internet connection, digital videos and 
photographs, smartphones, and 
websites. 
Teleorthodontics reduces costs and 
provides treatment access to a wider 
range of persons without compromising 
the quality of care. It also allows the 
orthodontist to maintain treatment control 
in situations where the patient cannot go 
to the clinic. 
Teleorthodontics can manage most emergencies, 
reassuring and following patients remotely, 
reducing patient’s office visits without 
compromising the results. 
 
Saccoman
no et al. 
[14] 
Italy 
To explain how tele-orthodontics 
represents the only way to 
perform orthodontics during a 
period of restriction as the one 
subsequent to COVID-19 
emergencies. 
Tele-orthodontics allowed to perform 
some orthodontic follow-ups with less 
chairside time, reduced time spent by the 
patients in the dental office from up to 45 
min, less risk of infection, fewer to no 
missed appointments, specific 
troubleshooting solutions, and more 
follow-ups with odontophobic patients.  
The need to respect safety distance and the fears 
patients have about the risk of infection make 
tele-orthodontics a fundamental tool during a 
pandemic lockdown and in its immediate post-
emergency phase. Tele-orthodontics 
demonstrated to be a viable tool to continue ar 
least some orthodontic care in times of 
emergency, but it may be considered an 
appropriate solution and addition even in normal 
times to ease therapy demands for both the 
orthodontist and the patients, while reducing time 
and money spent, without an excessive decrease 
in orthodontic quality. 
Turkistani 
[15]  
Saudi 
Arabia 
To report to orthodontists in the 
emergence, epidemiology, risks, 
and precautions during the 
disease crisis. 
Minimize aerosol production and 
reinforce strict infection control measures 
are important. Compliance with the 
highest level of personal protection and 
restriction of treatment to emergency 
cases is recommended during the 
outbreak. Surface disinfection, adequate 
ventilation, and decontamination of 
instruments and supplies following the 
guidelines are required. 
Reinforce strict infection control measures and 
minimizing personal contact and aerosol 
production are keys to prevent contamination 
within orthodontic settings. Although no cases of 
COVID-19 cross-transmissions within a dental 
facility have been reported, the risk exists, and 
the disease is still emerging. Further studies are 
required. 
 
Source: Author.
DISCUSSION 
 
 
There are concerns regarding the appearance, epidemiology, risks and 
precautions during the disease crisis [15] and implications of coronavirus infection for 
orthodontic treatment [5]. Preventive strategies for infection control [12] and aerosol 
reduction [13] have been reported. Additionally, there was the recommendation to use 
virtual assistance [11, 13, 14] and assessments regarding the impact of the pandemic 
on orthodontic consultations and on the anxiety generated in patients and 
professionals [6-9]. 
 
Due to the pandemic caused by the coronavirus, dental professionals must be 
aware of the occupational risks caused by COVID-19, and stay up to date on infection 
control guidelines. It is the orthodontist’s responsibility to ensure the safety of his/her 
team and prevent cross-contamination within the dental office [5,15]. 
 
The risk of acquiring COVID-19 can occur by several ways, including droplets 
of saliva from coughing or sneezing, indirect contact with droplets of saliva that have 
stuck to surfaces, aerosols generated during orthodontic procedures [11], during 
removal and replacement aligners, fixed or removable appliances and elastic and 
being in contact with several people and companions, bonding and removal of 
brackets, moldings, oral scanning, photographs, wire changes, and placement of mini 
implants [5]. Orthodontics instruments and materials that are not individually packaged 
can be a source of contamination [12]. As the coronavirus was also identified in the 
saliva of infected individuals [16], this biological fluid represents an additional risk for 
professionals and their relatives. [17]. 
 
Among the situations that can be considered urgent in Orthodontics, are the 
insertion of a wire from a fixed orthodontic appliance in the gum, oral mucosa leading 
to severe pain and/or infection, circumstances related to dental trauma in patients who 
use fixed or removable appliances, or other conditions in which the lack of care would 
be harmful to the patient, such as gingival inflammation resulting from the loosening of 
an orthodontic band or the detachment of brackets [18]. 
 
As tools for teleodontology, photos, videos or video calls, communication 
applications such as WhatsApp and Telegram, and websites [10,13] were used. Virtual 
assistance proved to be a good way to provide assistance to patients, with reduced 
costs, greater access to treatment, less risk of infection, less consultations, problem 
solving and more follow-up with odontophobic patients [10,13,14]. Remote monitoring 
is a viable way for some orthodontic care in times of pandemic, and can be considered 
a solution in normal times to facilitate the demands of orthodontic therapy [14]. 
 
Assessments regarding the impact of the pandemic on the orthodontic 
consultations and on the anxiety generated in patients and professionals were carried 
out through questionnaires. It was observed that the level of anxiety was more related 
to women than to men and that the greatest concern was associated with delayed 
treatment [6-9]. Fixed lingual appliances and invisible aligners were less associated 
with high levels of anxiety about the duration of treatment compared to conventional 
fixed appliances [9]. Professionals, on the other hand, reported fear of returning to their 
daily activities because they considered it a high risk for them and their families [6]. 
 
As can be seen, procedures related to orthodontic practice must strictly follow 
preventive measures to control the transmission of SARS-CoV-2, reducing the use of 
aerosol to minimize infections and avoid contamination of environments. Treatment 
guidelines can be provided in a remote format at first, and when necessary, treatment 
can be performed if the infection prevention and control protocol is followed. Finally, 
Teleorthodontics is a way of reassuring patients and professionals, and accompanying 
patients without compromising treatment results. 
 
CONCLUSIONS  
 
 
The need for social isolation imposed by the coronavirus has been shown to 
have an impact on scheduling orthodontic appointments, as well as on patient’s anxiety 
about prolonging their treatments. The use of communication technologies has been 
of great value in patient care, as well as in the initial screening before a face-to-face 
consultation. Strict infection control protocols must be adopted so that orthodontic 
practice is fully performed without offering risks to patients and professionals. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
1. Zhu N, Zhang D, Wang W, Li X, Yang B, Song J Xiang, Z, Huang B, Shi W, Lu R 
et al. A Novel Coronavirus from Patients with Pneumonia in China, 2019. N. Engl. J. 
Med. 2020, 382, 727–733. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2001017. 
 
2. Gorbalenya AE, Baker SC, Baric RS, de Groot RJ, Drosten C, Gulyaeva AA, et al. 
The species Severe acute respiratory syndrome- related coronavirus: classifying 
2019-nCoV and naming it SARS-CoV-2. Nat Microbiol 2020;5:536-44. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-020-0695-z. 
 
3. World Health Organization. Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) Situation Report–22. 
Available online: https: //www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/situation-
reports/20200211-sitrep-22-ncov.pdf.  
 
4. World Health Organization. Novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV): situation report-11. 
Available at: https://www.who.int/docs/ default-source/coronaviruse/situation-
reports/20200131-sitrep-11 ncov.pdf?sfvrsn5de7c0f7_4.  
 
5. Sunjay Suri, YR, Vandersluis, AS, Kochhar, RB, Mohamed-Nur A. Clinical 
orthodontic management during the COVID-19 pandemic. Angle Orthod.  2020; 90 
(4): 473–484. doi: https://doi.org/10.2319/033120-236.1. 
 
6. Martina S, Amato A, Rongo R, Caggiano M, Amato M. The Perception of COVID-
19 among Italian Dentists: An Orthodontic Point of View. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public 
Health 2020, 17(12), 4384; https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17124384. 
 
7. Peloso RM, Pini NIP, Sundfeld Neto D, Mori AA, Oliveira RCG, Valarelli FP et al . 
How does the quarantine resulting from COVID-19 impact dental appointments and 
patient anxiety levels?. Braz. oral res.  [Internet]. 2020; 34: e84. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/1807-3107bor-2020.vol34.0084. 
 
8. Cotrin, P, Peloso, RM, Oliveira, RC, et al. Impact of coronavirus pandemic in 
appointments and anxiety/concerns of patients regarding orthodontic 
treatment. Orthod Craniofac Res. 2020; 00: 1– 7. https://doi.org/10.1111/ocr.12395 
 
9. Xiong X, Wu Y, Fang X, Sun W, Ding Q, Yi Y, Huang Y, Gong J, Liu J, Wang J. 
Mental distress in orthodontic patients during the COVID-19 epidemic. American 
Journal of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics. 2020. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajodo.2020.07.005. 
 
10. Caprioglio A, Pizzetti GB, Zecca PA et al. Management of orthodontic 
emergencies during 2019-NCOV. Prog Orthod. 2020; 21(10). 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40510-020-00310-y. 
 
11. Eliades T, Koletsi D. Minimizing the aerosol-generating procedures in 
orthodontics in the era of a pandemic: Current evidence on the reduction of 
hazardous effects for the treatment team and patients, American Journal of 
Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics. 2020. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajodo.2020.06.002. 
 
12. Guo Y, Jing Y, Wang Y, To A, Du S, Wang L, Baia D. Control of SARS-CoV-2 
transmission in orthodontic practice, American Journal of Orthodontics and 
Dentofacial Orthopedics. 2020. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajodo.2020.05.006. 
 
13. Maspero C, Abate A, Cavagnetto D, El Morsi, M, Fama A, & Farronato, M. 
Available Technologies, Applications and Benefits of Teleorthodontics. A Literature 
Review and Possible Applications during the COVID-19 Pandemic. Journal of clinical 
medicine. 2020; 9(6): 1891. https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm9061891. 
 
14. Saccomanno S, Quinzi V, Sarhan S, Laganà D, Marzo G. Perspectives of tele-
orthodontics in the COVID-19 emergency and as a future tool in daily practice. 
European Journal of Paediatric Dentistry. 2020;21(2):157-162. DOI: 
10.23804/ejpd.2020.21.02.12. 
 
15. Turkistani KA. Precautions and recommendations for orthodontic settings during 
the COVID19 outbreak: a review, Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop. 2020. 
Doi: 10.1016/j.ajodo.2020.04.016. 
 
16. To KK, Tsang OT, Chik-Yan Yip C, et al. Consistent detection of 2019 novel 
coronavirus in saliva. Clin Infect Dis. 2020. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciaa149. 
 
17. Sabino-Silva R, Jardim ACG, Siqueira WL. Coronavirus COVID-19 impacts to 
dentistry and potential salivar diagnosis. Clin Oral Investig. 2020;24(4):1619–1621. 
doi: 10.1007/s00784-020-03248-x.  
 
18. American Association of Orthodontists. COVID-19 Resources Orthodontists. 
2020. Available at: https://www1. aaoinfo.org/covid-19/.  
 
