Based on a particular appropriation of the concept of "relatedness" - a concept
constructed within what we can call "new kinship" - I present a critical reading
of the concept of identity and propose a more dynamic alternative to the concept
in question.

To  consider  the  questions  that  interweave  kinship/relatedness  and
immigration,  we  follow  two  distinct  ethnographic  routes:  international
migration  from  the  region  of  Governador  Valadares  (M.G.)  and  Japanese
immigration to Brazil, through a series of distinct ethnographies  produced
about  this  theme  by  my  research  group.  The  studies  have  indicated  the
possibility  to  criticize  understanding  identity  based  on  the  concept  of
relatedness,  as we  will  come  to  see. The  current  state  of the  reflection is
indicated by the finding that the idea of “identity” has hidden a large field of
differences internal to groups considered homogeneously (such as Japanese-
descendants,  for  example),  in  addition  to  having  created  in  advance  the
existence of the “groups” that are to be explained. We find that relatedness
allows defining “groups” based on their own criteria. I have developed the idea
of  “differentialities”  to  consider  these  condensations  of  common  practices,
values and shared lives.

In Valadares, based on ethnographies conducted in the most humble
neighborhoods that are the source of most of the emigrants, we identified a
dynamic that we call “nano-houses” ((Machado 2010). We found that this is one
of the main stimuli to international mobility, built as a detour to realizing a
desire inscribed in the kinship orders. “Nano-houses” are the desire to centralize
a set of relationships and “socialities.” This centralization demands a material
expression of support: one’s own home that is capable of congregating the
nuclear family and bringing together the extended family and friends. It is this
material support that invariably indicates independence in relation to the other
socialities. With the home, one can “centralize,” without it, one can only be
centralized.

This  perception  of  need  for  material  resources  to  centralize
“immaterial” relationships articulates the desire for immigration, as an option to
shorten the process: to earn more money quickly, return, have a business and
prosper  economically  and  in  relations.  This  process  was  described
ethnographically, from – we can say - bottom to top. But it presupposes another
concept of kinship based on the notion of relatedness (Carsten 2004), in an effort
to understand the practical results of the analyses of emigration in Governador
Valardes. The option for kinship as an analytical route led us to reflect on the
diversity of the immigrant experience. The relationship between immigrant
Valadarense kinship and the production of the life of the immigrant in the
country of reception indicates that the notion of identity obscures the entire
process: what was seen as “identity” based on the experience of the Valadarense
immigrants in Portugal, for example, came to be seen as nothing more and
nothing less than kinship.

But the development of this reflection about diversity only advanced as
a theoretical reflection based on the second kinship route that we took upon
studying the Japanese presence in Brazil. In relation to the “Japaneses,” we were
interested in the diversity of Japanese experience in Brazil, enriched by the
analysis of Valadarense kinship in its imbrications with emigration. Using the
idea  of  “multiple  Japanesicities”  when  looking  at  the  Japanese  descendants
allowed  us  to  establish an alternative, particularly involving  other ways to
consider Japanese-descendent kinships (Machado 2011).

The option for multiple Japanesicities is derived from a concern with
complex processes within something generic such as a “Japanese-descendent
identity.” To look to the internal differences as “Japanesicities” facilitated a de-
hierarchization of the analysis: to see Japanesicity as multiple allows us to avoid
analyzing the conditions of these subjects as “more or less” Japanese, but as
Japanese in their own way. What I call Japanesicities can be seen as a “tangle” of
lines (Ingold 2007), of trajectories that are experienced and traveled together,
producing a  tangle,  a ball of self-referred  trajectories.  These  tangled  paths
produce something like ontologies, which are the fruit of sharing of perspectives
along the trajectory. In this sense, the tangles are totalities, but a type of totality
that is found in a ball of yarn: just pull the thread to unroll it and ravel it up again
in new tangles.

The Japanesicities, on the other hand, indicate a break with the notion of
margins, limits and static distinctions between Japaneses and Brazilians. There
are situations and processes that generate an encompassing, which eliminates,
subverts or destabilizes some presumptions. There are processes of production
of Japaneses that go beyond consanguinity – which is so important among the
Japanese and Japanese descendants, as various studies indicate – and racial
markings.  There  are  non-descendants  who  become  “more”  Japanese  than
descendants, following criteria of these Japanesicities. That is, there are non-
consanguine  kinships  constantly  operating,  tangling  a  facile  definition  of
Japanese, based on racial markers (narrow eyes).  

The look at Japanesicities allows a shift between race and ethnicity, or
even “culture”: Japanesicity has contours that can go beyond the universe of the
descendants. The idea of Japanesicities rests, therefore, exactly on that which is
of interest to us: the production of kinship. When we consider a different field of
relations  (not  limited  by  consanguinity),  we  find  Japanese  kinships  that
encompass various possibilities,  which can even encompass non-descendants
and exclude descendants. That is, we bring to the forefront the way that the
subjects operate their relations, establishing kinship networks that escape a
more traditional perspective. 

The recourse to differentiality appears to us to be useful for considering
the enormous variation of Japanese experiences in Brazil, mainly by leading to
an a priori negation of the group. This negation allowed us to present something
new, mainly concerning the extension and definition of who are the Japanese.
From a traditional point of view, the definition of the Japanese-descendants is
always mediated by a phenotypical appreciation: Japanese blood, a Japanese
face. That is, it is always tied to, even if not explicitly, Japanese kinship. The
group  is  always  defined  by the  biological  contours,  to  then think of other
possible differentiations. To escape biology allows us to think of Japanesicities as
fluid ontological processes that avoid that avoid seeing a population as being
limited by blood.

The ethnography in Valadares was able to demonstrate a kinship in
movement,  articulating  the  circulation  of people,  goods,  feelings,  ideas  and
powers. We can say that this example shows us what kinship does in Valadares.
The “Japanese examples,”  so to speak, through the contrast that they offer
among each other and with the study in Valadares, indicate various processes
articulating the experience, which we have provisorily called differentialities.
These same studies indicate that these differentialities are intensely related to
Japanese kinships in Brazil. We also perceive the “complex imbrication” that is
related to a doubt about the relationship between identity and relatedness, given
that the studies indicate that the commonly used notion of identity reifies the
existence of the group.

The reification appears when we deal generically with the “Japanese
descendants,” eliminating the differences internal to this set as essential for the
understanding of the social dynamics. The differentiality allows the perception
that  the  group  “Japanese  descendants”  is  not  necessarily  constituted  by
consanguinities  and  that  non-descendants  can  be  part  of  this  group,  and
descendants may not.  This dimension escapes the concept of identity.

Identity theory has dialoged with the criticism of culture since the end of
the 1980s,  stimulated by Cultural Studies, so that one can speak of behaviors,
shared signs, relations between groups (as long as they are eminently fleeting)
without  speaking  specifically  of  culture,  but  of  subjects  who  bear  various
identities. The practical effect was the opportunity to speak of the “identity of
the  immigrants,” for  example  as one  spoke of the  “culture of immigrants.”
Identity is a term that allows speaking of “Brazilian identity” and also of the
“identity of Pentecostal Brazilians.” There does not appear to be a problem of a
“set theory.”  This is possible with support from a theory of borders or limits to
difference. Defining the focus on the line that separates, independently from the
“cultural” (or identity) contents, the question of what the identity identifies, is
less important, as long as it is contained in the limits that define the group. That
is, to speak of identity, the group (or collective, or community, etc.) should be
defined a priori. The concern, in reality, is with what identifies the identity of a
previously defined group. 

This issue remains problematic although it is an anthropological issue –
that of difference. This leads us to speak of it always as identity. When the
internal difference of the immigrant population came to call more attention, the
notion of identity appears less efficient. On one hand, it was amorphous, with an
hierarchization of difference, and on the other, it induced the imagination of
similarity, of uniformity. Mainly, it led to thinking of this difference as accessory,
transitory and superficial. This superficiality is not able to deal with the diversity
of the processes as various “differentialities.”

I sought  to  summarize  how we  think of difference  at  the  heart  of
migrant “communities, articulating a concept that would escape the idea of
“identity.” The provisory concept of differentiality allows us to think of the
processes  involved  with  the  Japanese  presence  in  Brazil:  we  think  of
Japanesicities. On the other hand, we think of Valadarense kinship to express
similar phenomena in Governador Valadares: as a infinitesimal variation of the
familiar forms in Valadares - as Valardarense differentiality, articulated mainly
by kinship. The Valadarense kinship and the Japanese kinships that we analyze
have  in  common  the  production  of  differentialities,  nearly  as  structural
expressions.  Whether  in  the  course  of  the  discontinuous  Valadarense
ethnography, whose data highlight an encompassing kinship, or in the course of
the multiple ethnographies of the Japanesicities, whose narrative decants the
kinship, we have a single complex imbrication between kinship (relatedness),
differentialities and i/emigration. Both processes demonstrate that the concept
of identity may not account for the difference produced by the subjects.
