Publication status: Preprint has been published in a journal as an article
DOI of the published article: https://doi.org/10.1590/0102-469839705t
Gestures in the teaching and learning process: a systematic
literature review 
Savana dos Anjos Freitas, Agostinho Serrano de Andrade Neto
https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4045
Submitted on: 2022-05-04
Posted on: 2022-05-09 (version 1)
(YYYY-MM-DD)
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
1 
GESTURES IN THE TEACHING AND LEARNING PROCESS: A SYSTEMATIC LITERATURE 
REVIEW 
 
SAVANA DOS ANJOS FREITAS 
ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5122-8027 
AGOSTINHO SERRANO DE ANDRADE NETO 
ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7868-1526 
 
ABSTRACT: Can the gestures we perform aid the teaching and learning process? The present paper 
summarizes the state of the art on the subject within the field of education, with a specific eye on 
gestural communication. Research has been found at virtually all levels of education regarding the use 
of gestures as a way to assist students in learning a second language, inclusive education, and science 
and math education. In general, there is solid evidence supporting that gestural communication helps in 
the evaluation and introduction of a new word in the teaching of a second language; as an additional 
resource for teachers and students with disabilities and as a tool to contribute to the teaching of 
concepts considered abstract and complex in the field of science and mathematics teaching. Of interest 
is the strong evidence that gesture constitutes a hidden yet powerful channel to exchange information, 
learn, and even as a tool to help reason. 
 
Keywords: gestures, non-verbal communication, teaching, literature review, learning. 
 
GESTOS NO PROCESSO DE ENSINO E APRENDIZAGEM: UMA REVISÃO SISTEMÁTICA DE 
LITERATURA 
 
RESUMO: Os gestos que realizamos podem auxiliar no processo de ensino e aprendizagem? O 
presente artigo sintetiza o estado da arte sobre o assunto no campo da educação, com um olhar 
específico para a comunicação gestual. A pesquisa foi encontrada em praticamente todos os níveis de 
ensino sobre o uso de gestos como uma forma de ajudar os alunos a aprender uma segunda língua, 
educação inclusiva e educação de ciências e matemática. Em geral, existem evidências sólidas de que a 
comunicação gestual auxilia na avaliação e introdução de uma nova palavra no ensino de uma segunda 
língua; como recurso adicional para professores e alunos com deficiência e como ferramenta para 
contribuir para o ensino de conceitos considerados abstratos e complexos na área do ensino de ciências 
e matemática. Interessante é a forte evidência de que o gesto constitui um canal oculto, mas poderoso, 
para trocar informações, aprender e até mesmo como uma ferramenta para ajudar a raciocinar. 
 
Palavras-chave: gestos, comunicação não-verbal, ensino, revisão de literatura, aprendizagem. 
 
GESTOS EN EL PROCESO DE ENSEÑANZA Y APRENDIZAJE: UNA REVISIÓN DE LITERATURA 
SISTEMÁTICA 
 
RESÚMEN: ¿Pueden los gestos que realizamos para ayudar en el proceso de enseñanza y aprendizaje? 
El presente trabajo resume el estado del arte sobre el tema dentro del campo de la educación, con una 
mirada específica en la comunicación gestual. Se han encontrado investigaciones en prácticamente 
todos los niveles educativos sobre el uso de gestos como una forma de ayudar a los estudiantes a 
aprender un segundo idioma, educación inclusiva y educación científica y matemática. En general, existe 
evidencia sólida que respalda que la comunicación gestual ayuda en la evaluación e introducción de una 
nueva palabra en la enseñanza de una segunda lengua; como recurso adicional para docentes y 
estudiantes con discapacidad y como herramienta para contribuir a la enseñanza de conceptos 
considerados abstractos y complejos en el campo de la enseñanza de las ciencias y las matemáticas. Es 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4045
2 
de interés la fuerte evidencia de que el gesto constituye un canal oculto pero poderoso para 
intercambiar información, aprender e incluso como una herramienta para ayudar a la razón. 
 
Palabras clave: gestos, comunicación no verbal, enseñanza, revisión de literatura, aprendizaje. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
When people speak, they naturally gesticulate and gestures often reveal information that 
cannot easily be found in the speech. Students are no exception. A student's gestures can index 
moments of conceptual instability and teachers can use them to gain access to a student's thinking. 
Students can also discover new ideas from the gestures they produce during a class or the gestures they 
see their teachers produce. Gesture, therefore, has the power not only to reflect a student's 
understanding of a problem but also to change their understanding (NOVACK; GOLDIN-
MEADOW, 2015). 
According to Walkington, Chelule, Woods, and Nathan (2019), gestures play a key role in 
mathematical reasoning, being an indicator that mathematical understanding is embodied - inherently 
linked to action, perception, and the physical body. As students collaborate and engage in mathematical 
discussions, they use discourse practices such as explaining, refuting, and developing each other's 
reasoning, often mixing speech and gesture when talking. 
Developing research based on gesture analysis is promising since the use of gestures in 
education is still under-researched and a relatively new topic (FLOOD et al., 2014). Not only, one can 
infer how much gestures can help and contribute to the learning process, since it is naturally present in 
our daily lives, constituting - among other ways - a communication channel between the most capable 
tutor and the learner, a channel that is not properly discussed by most learning theories. 
However, what about the role of gestures between a teacher and his student when it comes 
to teaching and learning? What constitutes an important communication channel for classroom 
teaching and learning? How can gestures help in teaching? Is there research in education in the field of 
gesture analysis and teaching? Imbued with these questions, a literature review was conducted bringing 
the most relevant aspects and research related to education on this topic. Based on these questions, the 
present literature review seeks to answer the following question, that generally synthetizes our goals: 
What is the contribution of gestures (non-verbal communication) to the teaching and learning 
process? 
The objective of this article is to uncover evidence, both in the Brazilian and international 
educational published research, of the contribution of gestures to the teaching and learning processes, 
as well as how this specific field of research is evolving. 
 
METHOD 
 
This research aims to identify, through the literature review, research that brings 
contributions to how gestures can be a way to assist in the teaching and learning process of students. 
Therefore, to perform this research, we defined four different stages – or staples – that needed to be 
made to a satisfactory completion(Figure 1). 
Figure 1 shows the search procedures used. The first step was, after defining the search 
problem (discussed above), defining which databases, the search terms (key words) and the search 
period. After delimiting our research, the second stage of the research consisted of the search itself for 
research related to our central theme. 
The databases used were: Eric, Scopus and Google School. In these three databases, the 
following search terms were used: “gestures” + “learning” and, in both three search platforms, the search 
period between 2000 and 2019 was selected. 
The third part was the moment when we selected the articles through exclusion and 
inclusion criteria, which will be described in Table 1. Finally, the last stage of the research was the full 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4045
3 
reading of the articles and the elaboration of this text to find the answers to the central research 
problem of that article. 
 
 
Figure 1 - Research Procedures 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Research data. 
 
Just like Pereira et. al. (2019), we chose to perform two phases for the inclusion or 
exclusion of the selected articles during the literature review. The first phase consisted of reading the 
titles, abstracts, and keywords contained in the articles. Then, after the criteria we established, we head 
to the second phase. The second phase started by reading the integral paper selected in the first phase 
and, after reading them, classifying them according to their proximity and similarities. 
Below is a table that was created to guide us in the selection of articles (Table 1). These 
criteria were elaborated by the authors of the present article with a focused look that would contribute 
to getting us closer to an answer regarding the research problem that guides this literature review. 
 
 
Table 1 - Inclusion and exclusion criteria 
 
 
INCLUSION CRITERIA 
EXCLUSION CRITERIA 
CRITERIA 
Be written in Portuguese, 
English, or Spanish 
Articles not peer-reviewed 
Contain evidence of the use of 
gestures in the teaching and 
learning process in the summary 
Research that did not bring 
collaborations on the presence 
of gestures in the teaching and 
learning process 
Preference for research that has 
been applied in the classroom 
They did not contain the words 
“gestures” or “learning” or 
“teaching” in the keywords 
Source: Research data. 
 
Therefore, after the selection of the 69 articles according to the established criteria, we 
opted to separate teaching levels at first, so that it was possible to identify at which stage of the 
academic trajectory there is a greater presence of research on gestures in the process of teaching and 
learning. We also made a historical sequence of the articles by publication date, so we could detect if 
there is an increase or not of publication in gestures, indicating an increase in research interest. The 
final grouping of the articles found in phase 1 was made after reading the content of each article, and 
the categories emerged from reading them naturally. 
• Identify research 
problem and 
define datebases 
and seach period
Part I
• Search databases 
with "gestures" + 
"learning"
Part II
• Select articles by 
exclusion and 
inclusion criteria
Part III
• Reading the 
articles and 
answering the 
reserch problem
Part IV
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4045
4 
 
 
 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
 
The results indicate that production in the field of gesture as a way of teaching or learning 
has seen an ongoing increase since 2009 (Graph 1). 
 
Graph 1 - Articles published from the year 2002 
Source: Research data. 
 
Regarding the distribution of papers according to the categories that emerged during the 
review, most of them (71%) are related to activities applied in classrooms; 21% relate to research that 
addresses the teaching of a second language through gesture and inclusive education; and finally, 8% 
with articles that we categorized as theoretical reflection. 
From the studies done in the classroom, Elementary School and Higher Education are the 
levels of education that were found to be the most researched, while postgraduate classrooms have very 
little researches that address the subject of gestures in education (Graph 2). 
 
Graph 2 - Division of research by level of education
 
Kindergarten
Elementary School
High school
College
Postgraduate studies
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4045
5 
Source: Research data. 
 
 
After the initial, pre-defined categories of analysis were made (categorized by year, school 
level, etc) a second categorization was made. To understand the contribution of gestures to the teaching 
and learning process, we aimed to group the articles found in the literature review into categories that 
would be meaningful to answering our research question. These categories naturally emerged after 
reading the articles and considering their similarities and their contributions to the teaching and learning 
process. 
The categories are: the construction of knowledge/concepts, analysis of non-verbal 
communication by students, analysis of non-verbal communication by teachers, analysis of mental 
images of teachers, teaching for inclusive education, and, finally, the teaching of languages (Figure 2). 
These categories will allow us to find possibilities and the relevance that gestures can 
contribute to the teaching process through research already carried out in the classroom and at different 
levels of education. The first category shows us how the gestures, both of teachers and students, can 
help students in their knowledge construction, that is, through gestures, students can express 
themselves and understand differently from the usual concepts that are abstract or not so close to their 
daily life. The second and third categories help us to see how the analysis of non-verbal 
communication, the gestures, of students and teachers, is relevant to the teaching and learning process. 
It is through analysis that it is possible to understand their questions, their understanding, and other 
situations to improve teaching. 
The fourth category presents us with two articles that articulate and bring techniques on 
how gestures can provide an understanding of students' mental images. The students' mental images 
can be revealed through gesticulation. The gestures helped, according to these articles, to understand 
what went on in the students' minds when they talked among their colleagues, teachers and tried to 
explain and justify their answers about concepts pertinent to the discipline of Physics. 
The penultimate category, inclusive education, addresses research on how gestures were 
relevant to the teaching of students with inclusion and, in particular, autistic students. The last category 
includes articles that corroborate the teaching of a second language or the mother tongue itself through 
gestures. Therefore, for a better understanding of the categories, the following diagram shows the 
research question, the categories, and the authors that corroborate the different categories. 
 
 
 
Figure 2 - Category layout 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4045
6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Research data. 
 
 
Construction of knowledge/concepts 
 
Do the gestures help students learn, but not just by directing their visual attention? Based 
on this conception, Wakefield et al. (2019) used eye-tracking to explore a frequently proposed 
mechanism - the gesture's ability to direct visual attention. Based on previous studies by Singer and 
Goldin-Meadow (2005), the authors state how it is possible to teach a new concept through gestures, in 
which hand movements accompany the speech. The research made it possible to verify that, using eye-
tracking measures, children who attend a math class with gestures allocate their visual attention 
differently from children who attend a math class without gestures - they analyze more the problem 
being explained, look less at the instructor, and were more likely to synchronize their visual attention 
with the information presented in the instructor's speech. 
In 2012, Garcia and Infante published an article in which they addressed the impact that 
gestures can have on the mathematical environment in workshops given in higher education. After the 
workshops, the researchers realized that there was a correlation between diagramming and gestures 
(dynamic and static). These two types of gestures were part of the students' constructive thinking, 
relating them to the problem or the construction of their diagrams. The more challenging the problems, 
the more students gesticulate. Some issues were influenced by gestures by their colleagues and over 
time they were adopted and adapted. 
In the search to understand how gestures can help in teaching in STEM, Stieff, Lira, and 
Scopelitis (2016), from Chicago (USA), describe two studies that verified the impact on teaching when 
students used gestures to support their thinking in space in STEM content. In the first study, the 
effectiveness of watching and reproducing gestures or reading a text was compared. In the second 
study, the effectiveness of the gesture was compared with an instructional approach that involved the 
handling of concrete models, but without gestures. The results indicated that gestures can be an 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4045
7 
effective strategy to support students' spatial thinking in STEM subjects because, with the use of 
gestures, students performed significantly better than without gestures. 
Chue, Lee, and Tan (2015) conducted their research in higher education in the discipline of 
Chemistry in Singapore. Their research sought, first, to conduct a brief review of the literature on 
communication and education, to articulate possible contributions of iconic gestures in science 
education. Then, they analyzed the iconic gestures performed by a university professor when 
exemplifying abstract concepts, such as size, position, and movement of particles. The researchers 
suggest that iconic gestures may illuminate aspects of abstract scientific meaning, being a more 
complete version of meaning than just speech. 
Therefore, these four studies show how gestures can help in the construction of 
knowledge. The gestures follow the speech and the more difficult and necessary a deep explanation, the 
presence of gestures becomes increasingly more important, becoming support for students' thinking 
and reasoning in the teaching and learning process. 
 
Analysis of non-verbal communication of students 
 
When students share about subjects that were discussed during class with other people, 
have you noticed that they often end up using gestures to explore and explain their ideas and concepts? 
According to research by Flood et al. (2014), this would be like a publicly visible space-dynamic means 
of expression, in which gestures and the body provide productive resources to imagine the 
submicroscopic, three-dimensional, and dynamic phenomena of chemistry together. 
Laburú, Silva, and Zômpero (2015) researched high school students about concepts of 
Electrostatics through experimental activities, intending to understand the scientific concepts of 
students. When evaluating the students through the experimental activity, it was found that the 
concepts cannot be “visualized” and their incorrect domain, or the lack of it, can unduly demonstrate 
conceptual unintelligibility, and the difficulty of the apprentice can be located in these elements and not 
in the conceptual dimension, as such. Therefore, the gestures contribute, according to these 
researchers, as an instrument for the teacher to understand what students are learning about scientific 
knowledge and, besides, it ends up being fundamental for the construction of the thought of that 
knowledge. 
In 2015, in the USA, Weinberg, Fukawa-Connelly, and Wiesner (2015) published research 
that sought to understand how gestures can help in thinking and communicating in the discipline of 
Mathematics. The research took place at a public university in an introductory abstract algebra 
discipline. The results indicated that the mathematical meanings - specific and general - are expressed in 
gestures and highlight the integrated nature of the elements of the semiotic package. 
Through the analysis of their students from the research presented in this category, it was 
seen that gestures end up becoming an instrument for teachers to understand their students, their 
difficulties when expressing themselves through words and that, through gestural analysis, there is a 
way to capture what goes on in the minds of the students, especially when portraying abstract concepts. 
 
Analysis of teachers’ non-verbal communication 
 
In 2017, Aizawa, Giordan, and Silva published their research with graduate students in their 
mandatory undergraduate internships. Using the technique of Video-Stimulated Remembrance, the 
students were filmed when they taught their classes, and, afterward, they analyzed their gestures 
through the categories of Kendon (2004). The results of this research point out that the undergraduates 
“developed both a gestural and multimodal perception, that is, they became aware of what was said, of 
the positioning of the body and hands so that in the future they can modify their actions with the main 
objective of producing meanings. ” (Aizawa, Giordan, & Silva, 2017). 
In Brazil, in 2014, Mortimer et al. investigated how two university teachers mobilized 
different semiotic modes and promoted interaction between them for the construction of meanings in 
Chemistry class. After the teachers were recorded while teaching their classes, they were analyzed. The 
analysis showed that each teacher uses and articulates different semiotic modes, such as speech, 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4045
8 
gestures, drawings on the board, being these means to communicate with students. The research 
identified that these semiotic modes and, in particular, gestures, contribute to the construction of 
meanings in the classroom. 
Both Brazilian researchers were able to find in their research how the gestural analysis of 
teachers can find new paths for teaching, in addition to assisting teachers during their classes. These 
researches show how relevant it is for teachers to be aware of their gestures when teaching their classes. 
Through gestures, they can facilitate students' understanding, as well as pass on distorted or erroneous 
concepts. 
 
Analysis of mental images of students 
 
Scherr (2008) goes beyond the other researches mentioned so far on gestures in higher 
education. His research seeks evidence that students' gesticulation can not only fill in gaps in students' 
verbal expressions but offer valuable information about what is going on in students' minds, that is, to 
better understand what the student is thinking about Physics at that particular moment. "Physics 
education is a rich field to further explore these issues, and researchers in physics education can benefit 
and contribute to ongoing investigations into the importance of gesture in thinking and learning." 
(Scherr, 2008). 
Like the research made by Garcia and Infante (2012), Ramos and Serrano (2013) also 
carried out their investigation through a workshop (extension course) for undergraduates. The 
researchers interviewed undergraduate chemistry students after carrying out activities using molecular 
modeling software. Analogous to the considerations of Scherr (2008), the researchers in the interviews 
tried to find out what was going on in the students' minds when answering the questions, that is, it was 
possible to identify a link with the gestures and what they imagined at that moment to answer the 
questions. 
This category gives us indications that gestures can reveal what is going on in students' 
minds when explaining to someone about certain content or when explaining their responses. Gestural 
analysis using techniques, such as Think Aloud, provides an understanding of the articulation between 
students' gestures and mental images. 
 
 
Inclusive education 
 
Marchena et al. (2019) conducted research in which they observed adults and how they 
used gestures. Twenty-one verbally fluent autistic adults and another twenty-one typically developing 
controls involved in a controlled conversational task. 
Autistic adults were more likely to gesture unilaterally than bilaterally, a motor characteristic 
of the individual gesture associated with symptoms of autism. According to the researchers, co-speech 
gestures can provide a link between symptoms of non-verbal communication and known differences in 
motor performance in autism. 
Özçalışkan, Adamson, Dimitrova, and Baumann (2018) showed in their research that 
children and parents produce similar types of gestures and gesture-speech combinations. That is, when 
researching children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) or Down syndrome (DS), they observed the 
specific differences in diagnosis concerning children with typical development (TD) in the production 
of gestures. However, only the children - but not the parents - showed specific variability of the 
diagnosis in the frequency with which they produced each type of gesture and gesture-speech 
combination. 
Gestural understanding remains poorly studied, according to Dimitrova, Özçalışkan, and 
Adamson (2017), from Sweden, especially with children with autism spectrum and who have difficulty 
in producing gestures. Following the studies by McNeill (2005), these groups of researchers examined 
children aged 2 to 4 years old, to understand the types of gestures and the combinations between 
gesture and speech. The results obtained suggest that children understand deictic gestures and 
reinforcement gestures - better speech combinations than iconic/conventional gestures and 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4045
9 
supplementary combinations - a pattern that remains robust at different ages in children with autism 
spectrum. 
The study by Wray et al. (2017) sought to determine whether children with language 
disorders use gestures to compensate for their language difficulties. From the research, it was possible 
to detect that the gesture and language form a communication system closely linked, in which the 
deficits of gestures are seen alongside difficulties with spoken communication. 
 
Language teaching 
 
Do children understand iconic gestures about events as early as iconic gestures about 
entities? From this question, Glasser et al. (2018) aim to understand whether children understand iconic 
gestures that characterize events as early as possible and, if so, whether their understanding is 
influenced by gesture production patterns in their native language. The research found that native 
patterns of gesture production influenced the understanding of the gestures of children that 
characterize these events, with a better understanding of gestures that follow specific language patterns 
compared to those that do not follow these patterns, especially in the way of movement of gestures. 
Recently, in 2019, Huang, Kim, and Christianson, from the University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign presented that gestures are useful if they are not to be confused with other words 
to be learned and if the number of words presented was limited. This research showed that introducing 
new words in a second language and presenting the word with simultaneous gestures can facilitate the 
recall of new words by students. The researchers address the theory of double coding, in which it 
predicts that students can learn better by having the articulation between gestures and new words. 
In 2017, at the University of Pennsylvania, researchers Matsumoto and Dobs conducted a 
study in which they investigated the functions of gesture in teaching and learning grammar in the 
context of classroom interactions in a second language, as did Huang, Kin, and Christianson (2019), but 
now in higher education. The research consisted of the analysis of the gestures used by the teachers to 
explain temporal concepts of the English language and the students when they answered. The analysis 
reached the considerations that teachers and students repeatedly used abstract and metaphorical lithic 
gestures in the classroom, which can become important resources for instruction and assessment of 
student learning. 
Eighty-nine students from the University of International Studies in Xi'an, China, 
participated in research that aimed to understand whether tuning gestures can improve the learning of 
prosody (part of the traditional grammar that is dedicated to the characteristics of the emission of the 
speech sounds, such as accent and intonation). The authors Yuan, González-Fuente, Baills, and Prieto 
(2019) carried out their research in which they divided students into two identical groups, the first 
group (control group) received intonation training without the use of tuning gestures. The second 
group, experimental, received the same training, but with more tuning gestures, representing contours 
of nuclear intonation. The results of the research provide evidence that the experimental group has 
improved significantly and that even though individuals who have stronger skills have obtained a better 
result, those who had weaker musical skills have benefited even more by observing the gestures. 
Vogt and Kauschke (2017), from Germany, observed how iconic gestures can help 
developing children to learn new words. According to the researchers, iconic gestures promote richer 
coding and lead to more efficient word learning in children who are at the beginning of speech 
development or with language problems. 
 
Consequences of gestures in the teaching and learning process 
 
The main purpose of gestures is to assist communication. But, in addition to being 
important to communication, gestures also have important consequences for thinking and learning, to 
understanding language. More than just clarifying or improving the message of a lesson, it can lead 
students to understand and promote conceptual development, which is the primary focus of this 
research (Chu & Kita, 2016). 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4045
10 
In the classroom, when a student swings his arm wildly when the teacher asks a question; 
or another tries not to make eye contact with the teacher, both are using their bodies to tell the teacher 
that they want to answer the question. These body movements constitute what is normally called non-
verbal communication (Goldin-Meadow, 2017). 
According to Goldin-Meadow (2018), gesture has the potential to boost learning in all 
children and perhaps reduce inequalities in performance in language and mathematics. Also, it can be a 
tool that helps teachers understand what is going on in the students' minds, as well as understand how 
much they learned from the content through their speeches articulated with their gestures. 
The gesture can be well used in educational environments and, according to Goldin-
Meadow (2017), it can exist in at least three ways. The first would be for teachers to examine their 
gestures to ensure that they are not conveying ideas that might mislead students. Teachers can even 
think about how the ideas they want to teach can be displayed in their hands and then consciously 
produce these gestures during classes. 
Students can be encouraged to gesture when they explain a problem. The gestures that 
students produce will probably demonstrate their understanding of the evolution of the problem, which 
is not yet evident in their speech. These gestures can then serve as a diagnosis that teachers can use to 
find out what their students know and what they are ready to learn. 
Finally, being encouraged to gesture about a problem can help students activate any 
implicit ideas they have about that problem. This activation, in turn, can make them more open to new 
instructions (Goldin-Meadow, 2017). Therefore, gestures not only reflect thinking but also have the 
potential to change thinking in listeners and speakers. The gesture is a tool that students, teachers, and 
researchers can use to make discoveries about the mind. 
According to Chu and Kita (2016), there is evidence that the gestures of co-judgment and 
co-speech share several properties, suggesting that they are generated by a common mechanism. 
According to the researchers, people produce more co-production gestures when speech production is 
more difficult than when it is less difficult. They produce more judgmental gestures when a quiet 
problem-solving task is more difficult than when it is less difficult. 
Finally, a gesture not only reflects our thoughts but also our role in changing those 
thoughts. We know gestures that can transmit substantive information so that it is not difficult to 
imagine that we could learn by seeing the gestures that other people produce. But to be sure, we need 
to manipulate the gesture and explore the impact of that manipulation on learning (Goldin-Meadow, 
2017). 
 
 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
The evolution of published research on the use of gestures in classrooms clearly shows 
how this theme is growing over the years, and readily becoming increasingly more fascinating. Since 
2009, there has been an increase in the publication of articles concerning nonverbal communication in 
journals, with classroom applications or even more theoretical discussions, allowing readers to wonder 
the importance of this  - old and at the same time new – communication channel with results reporting 
as gestures can assist in the teaching of a second language, in the area of inclusive education and 
specially in the teaching of science and mathematics, which many students find difficult. 
Gestures in the teaching of a second language can contribute to the way a new word is 
presented, the way an assessment is performed, and even provide greater articulation between the 
gestures and the new words. In inclusive education, the use of gestures may provide new avenues for 
research in this area, perhaps a new resource that contributes and assists teachers and students with 
disabilities or disorders. And in science and mathematics teaching, gestures emerge as a tool to 
contribute to the teaching of concepts considered abstract and complex. 
During the normal speech, when we detail our thinking or try to explain a concept or 
specially a scientific model to a teacher or classmate, we end up using gestures to express ourselves. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4045
11 
Those gestures are acutely important, as it is possible through them to find out student’s mental images 
and often there is an opportunity to understand gaps in the student's speech. Therefore, we also 
conclude our literature review assessing the important role that gestures can play in the teaching-
learning process, bringing new perspectives and paths for education, as well as new resources that aim 
to contribute to the students' academic formation. 
Of special notice is that gesture can be viewed as an “external device” that aids humans 
when reasoning about different subjects, including aiding in visuospatial thinking. Gestures are used to 
express ideas between subjects (external function) and most likely also internalized as images (internal 
function), much like how Vygotsky (1986) describes the relation between thought and language, a 
conclusion that the authors would like to offer with this review. 
To conclude, returning to the research question of this paper, "What is the contribution of 
gestures (non-verbal communication) in the teaching and learning process?" we can definitively say that 
gestures present themselves as a very important factor that contributes to the teaching and learning 
process, that they can’t be overlooked and its analysis should be integrated into the teacher training 
curriculum. Therefore, not only the field of research in Education, but also the practice of education 
both in formal and non-formal spaces, should consider non-verbal communication, and specially 
gestures – that try to depict a certain thought in the minds of teachers or apprentices – as important 
and relevant as speech and new research should be done to set the limits and possibilities of addressing 
this important channel of communication between humans.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
AIZAWA, A., GIORDAN, M.,; SILVA, A. B. A. Lembrança Estimulada por Vídeo como ferramenta 
de análise dos modos gestuais de licenciandos de Química. In: Anais do XI Encontro Nacional de 
Pesquisa em Educação em Ciências, Florianópolis, SC. Anais do XI Encontro Nacional de Pesquisa 
em Educação em Ciências, Florianópolis, SC, 2017. 
CHUE, S.; LEE, Y.; TAN, K.C.D. Iconic gestures as undervalued representations during science 
teaching. Cogent Education, v. 2, n. 1, p. 1-12, 2015.  
CHU, M.; KITA, S. Co-thought and co-speech gestures are generated by the same action generation 
process. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, v. 42, n. 2, p. 
257-270, 2016. 
DIMITROVA, N.; ÖZÇALIŞKAN, S.; ADAMSON, L. B. Do verbal children with autism 
comprehend gesture as readily as typically developing children? Journal of autism and 
developmental disorders, v. 47, n. 10, p. 3267-3280, 2017. 
FLOOD, V. J. et al. Paying attention to gesture when students talk chemistry: Interactional resources 
for responsive teaching. Journal of Chemical Education, v. 92, n. 1, p. 11-22, 2014. 
GARCIA, N.; INFANTE, N. E. Gestures as Facilitators to Proficient Mental Modelers.  North 
American Chapter of the International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education, 
2012. 
GLASSER, M.L.; WILLIAMSON, R. A.; ÖZÇALIŞKAN, S. Do Children Understand Iconic Gestures 
About Events as Early as Iconic Gestures About Entities? Journal of psycholinguistic research, v. 
47, n. 3, p. 741-754, 2018. 
GOLDIN-MEADOW, S. Taking a Hands-on Approach to Learning. Policy Insights from the 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, v. 5, n. 2, p. 163-170, 2018.   
GOLDIN‐MEADOW, S. Using our hands to change our minds. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: 
Cognitive Science, v. 8, n. 1-2, p. 1-6, 2017.  
HUANG, X.; KIM, N.; CHRISTIANSON, K. Gesture and vocabulary learning in a second 
language. Language Learning, v. 69, n. 1, p. 177-197, 2019.  
KENDON, A. Gesture: Visible action as utterance. Cambridge University Press, 2004. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4045
12 
LABURÚ, C.E.; SILVA, O.H.M.; ZÔMPERO, A.F. Significados de eletrostática interpretados por 
meio da gesticulação de estudantes. Ciência & Educação (Bauru), v. 21, n. 4, p. 851-867, 2015. 
MARCHENA, A. et al. Atypicalities of gesture form and function in autistic adults. Journal of 
autism and developmental disorders, v. 49, n. 4, p. 1438-1454, 2019.  
MATSUMOTO, Y.; DOBS, A.M. Pedagogical gestures as interactional resources for teaching and 
learning tense and aspect in the ESL grammar classroom. Language Learning, v. 67, n. 1, p. 7-42, 
2017. 
MCNEILL, D. Gesture and Thought. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005. 
MORTIMER, E. et al. Interações entre modos semióticos e a construção de significados em aulas de 
ensino superior. Ensaio Pesquisa em Educação em Ciências (Belo Horizonte), v. 16, n. 3, p. 121-
146, 2014.  
NOVACK, M.; GOLDIN-MEADOW, S. Learning from gesture: How our hands change our 
minds. Educational psychology review, v. 27, n. 3, p. 405-412, 2015.  
ÖZÇALIŞKAN, S. et al. Do parents model gestures differently when children’s gestures differ? 
Journal of autism and developmental disorders, v. 48, n. 5, p. 1492-1507, 2018.  
PEREIRA, N. L. et al. Boas práticas em ambientes virtuais de ensino e de aprendizagem: uma revisão 
de forma sistemática na literatura. Educação em Revista, v. 35, 2019. 
RAMOS, A.; SERRANO, A. Como são internalizadas as competências adquiridas quando um aluno 
utiliza computadores? Um exemplo de mediação cognitiva em rede durante a utilização de software de 
modelagem molecular. In: Anais do IX Encontro Nacional de Pesquisa em Educação em Ciências, 
Águas de Lindóia, SP. Anais do IX Encontro Nacional de Pesquisa em Educação em Ciências, 
Águas de Lindóia, SP, 2013.  
SCHERR, R. E. Gesture analysis for physics education researchers. Physical Review Special Topics-
Physics Education Research, v. 4, n. 1, p. 010101-1-010101-9, 2008.  
SINGER, M. A.; GOLDIN-MEADOW, S. Children learn when their teacher's gestures and speech 
differ. Psychological Science, v. 16, n. 2, p. 85-89, 2005. 
STIEFF, M.; LIRA, M. E.; SCOPELITIS, S. A. Gesture supports spatial thinking in STEM. Cognition 
and Instruction, v. 34, n. 2, p. 80-99, 2016. 
VYGOTSKY, L. S. Thought and language-Revised edition. Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, 1986. 
VOGT, S.; KAUSCHKE, C. Observing iconic gestures enhances word learning in typically developing 
children and children with specific language impairment. Journal of child language, v. 44, n. 6, p. 
1458-1484, 2017.  
WAKEFIELD, E. M. et al. Breaking down gesture and action in mental rotation: Understanding the 
components of movement that promote learning. Developmental Psychology, v.55, n. 5, p.981-993, 
2019. 
WALKINGTON, C. et al. Collaborative gesture as a case of extended mathematical cognition. The 
Journal of Mathematical Behavior, v. 55, p. 1-20, 2019.  
WEINBERG, A.; FUKAWA-CONNELLY, T.; WIESNER, E. Characterizing instructor gestures in a 
lecture in a proof-based mathematics class. Educational Studies in Mathematics, v. 90, n. 3, p. 233-
258, 2015. 
WRAY, C. et al. Gesture production in language impairment: it's quality, not quantity, that 
matters. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, v. 60, n. 4, p. 969-982, 2017. 
YUAN, C. et al. Observing pitch gestures favours the learning of Spanish intonation by Mandarin 
speakers. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, v. 41, n. 1, p. 5-3, 2019.  
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4045
13 
 
AUTHORS' CONTRIBUTION 
 
Author 1 – Active participation in data collection and analysis, such as writing the article. 
Author 2 – Data analysis and writing and review of the article. 
  
DECLARATION OF CONFLICT OF INTEREST 
  
The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest with this article. 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4045
This preprint was submitted under the following conditions: 
The authors declare that they are aware that they are solely responsible for the content of the preprint and
that the deposit in SciELO Preprints does not mean any commitment on the part of SciELO, except its
preservation and dissemination.
The authors declare that the necessary Terms of Free and Informed Consent of participants or patients in
the research were obtained and are described in the manuscript, when applicable.
The authors declare that the preparation of the manuscript followed the ethical norms of scientific
communication.
The authors declare that the data, applications, and other content underlying the manuscript are
referenced.
The deposited manuscript is in PDF format.
The authors declare that the research that originated the manuscript followed good ethical practices and
that the necessary approvals from research ethics committees, when applicable, are described in the
manuscript.
The authors declare that once a manuscript is posted on the SciELO Preprints server, it can only be taken
down on request to the SciELO Preprints server Editorial Secretariat, who will post a retraction notice in its
place.
The authors agree that the approved manuscript will be made available under a Creative Commons CC-BY
license.
The submitting author declares that the contributions of all authors and conflict of interest statement are
included explicitly and in specific sections of the manuscript.
The authors declare that the manuscript was not deposited and/or previously made available on another
preprint server or published by a journal.
If the manuscript is being reviewed or being prepared for publishing but not yet published by a journal, the
authors declare that they have received authorization from the journal to make this deposit.
The submitting author declares that all authors of the manuscript agree with the submission to SciELO
Preprints.
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
