The full spectrum of COVID-19 is still emerging, although several studies have highlighted that patients infected with the novel 
coronavirus can potentially develop a hypercoagulable state. However, several aspects related to the incidence and pathophysiology of the 
association between COVID-19 and pulmonary embolism are not well established. Here, we present a case of a patient with COVID-19 
who developed acute pulmonary embolism. Clinical and laboratory data and findings of non-enhanced CT indicate possibility of acute 
pulmonary embolism, and support the decision to proceed with computed tomography pulmonary angiography that can objectively 
identify filling defects in pulmonary arterial branches.

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is caused by a 
betacoronavirus named severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Since its outbreak in Wuhan, China, 
in December 2019, the novel coronavirus has spread worldwide. 
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the 
COVID-19 as a pandemic1.

Most of the patients with COVID-19 have mild disease 
symptoms2. However, few patients can develop acute respiratory 
distress syndrome (ARDS) and other complications, including 
thrombotic phenomena in macro- and micro-circulation2-5.
Coagulopathy is commonly observed in ARDS/sepsis and can 
predict outcomes in severe/critical COVID-19 cases2-5, 3-6.  Abnormal 
coagulation parameters (elevated levels of D-dimer and fibrin 
degradation products) significantly correlate with mortality in 
patients with COVID-196. Moreover, the SARS-CoV-2 may induce 
a cytokine storm along with activation of the coagulation cascade 
that leads to the thrombotic phenomena5,7.

Further, pulmonary embolism (PE) in patients with COVID-19 has 
received increasing attention in the medical community1,3,8,9.  These 
patients are prone to an increased risk of venous thromboembolism1,8.

Here, we present the case of a 52-year-old male patient 
who visited our emergency department with a 5-day history of 
fever, myalgia, abdominal pain, headache, cough, and dyspnea. 
The patient reported asthma, but no recent attack. He denied 
other comorbidities, smoking, or continued medication use. On 
admission, the patient’s vital signs were normal, with peripheral 
oxygen saturation (SpO2) >95%. The white blood cell (WBC) count 
and C-reactive protein level showed no significant abnormalities. 
Rapid influenza diagnostic test was negative. The patient underwent 
a non-enhanced chest computed tomography (CT) scan that 
revealed few scattered ground-glass opacities in both the lungs, 
with a predominantly peripheral distribution (Figure 1A). Real-
time reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR) 
of the nasopharyngeal swab tested positive for the SARS-CoV-2 
nucleic acid, thereby confirming the diagnosis of COVID-19. He 
was hospitalized for 3 days. Antibiotic therapy (azithromycin) was 
administered.

Eleven days after hospital discharge (afebrile for more than 1 
week), the patient was readmitted due to a 2-day history of fever, 
acute-onset right-sided back pain, and respiratory discomfort. His 
SpO2 was 93% on room air and >95% after oxygen supplementation 
(1L/min) by nasal catheter. On examination, he was afebrile, 
with a heart rate of 113 beats/min, blood pressure of 136/85 
mmHg, and respiratory rate of 24 breaths/min. The thoracic 
auscultation indicated bilaterally reduced vesicular murmur with 
bibasilar crackles. Repeat non-enhanced chest CT showed an 
increase in the extent of bilateral and multilobar lung involvement 
by predominantly peripheral multifocal opacities, along with 
consolidation, and development of sub-pleural lines and newer 
ground-glass opacities (Figure 1B). A newly developed right-
sided laminar pleural effusion was observed. An increase in the 
heart volume and pulmonary trunk diameter relative to the initial 
CT examination drew attention. The Wells score for PE was <2 
points. The patient’s WBC count was 11090/mm3 (neutrophils, 
8320/mm3; lymphocytes, 1600/mm3; monocytes, 1090/mm3), 
hemoglobin level was 13.9 g/dL, platelet count was 296000/mm3, 
serum D-dimer level was 2317 ng/mL Fibrinogen Equivalent 
Units (FEU; upper limit of normal, 500 ng/mL FEU), troponin 
I level was normal (<0.16 ng/mL), C-reaction protein level was  
5.08 mg/dL (reference value, <1.00 mg/dL), lactate dehydrogenase 
level was 613 U/L (upper limit of normal, 480 U/L), prothrombin 
time was 14.2 s (reference range, 10.1–12.8 s), and activated partial 
thromboplastin time was 28.9 s (reference range, 25.4–33.4 s). A 
repeat rRT-PCR of nasopharyngeal swab tested positive for the 
SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid. The patient underwent a transthoracic 
echocardiography that revealed normal findings. Since the right-
sided back pain persisted on the second day of rehospitalization, CT 
pulmonary angiography was performed. It showed filling defects 
in sub-segmental arterial branches of the posterior basal segment 
of the right lower lobe, consistent with acute PE (Figure 1C and  
Figure 1D). Additionally, the peripheral lung opacity with reversed 
halo sign and central lucencies, compatible with pulmonary 
infarction, could be detected in this examination (Figure 1E). Dual-
energy CT color-coded iodine “perfusion” map revealed only a focal 
iodine defect in the posterior basal segment of the right lower lobe, 
where the pulmonary infarction was detected (Figure 1F). The lupus 
anticoagulant testing was found positive. The patient was treated 
with a full-dose anticoagulant drug (subcutaneous enoxaparin) 
and antibiotics (azithromycin and piperacillin/tazobactam). He 
showed clinical and laboratory improvement, and was discharged 
in good general condition after 4 days of full anticoagulation, with 
rivaroxaban prescribed for home use.

This case report described a patient infected with SARS-CoV-2 who 
developed acute PE several days after the onset of viral pneumonia. 
Before the outbreak of COVID-19, case reports had already described 
concurrent PE and viral lung infections9. Visseren et al.10 concluded 
that respiratory viruses induce procoagulant activity in cultured human 
endothelial cells, although coronaviruses were not included in their 
study (published in 2000). A proinflammatory, hypercoagulable state 
may occur in patients with severe/critical COVID-19 symptoms, 
and possibly plays an important role in the development of PE1,4,5,9. 
Another factor that may favor the formation of PE is reduced physical 
movement due to quarantine restrictions or hospitalization (elevated 
risk of deep vein thrombosis)1. The published pathological reports 
and verbal communications have described presence of microvascular 
thrombosis and PE in the few cases with COVID-19 autopsied to 
date4.  However, further studies are necessary to better comprehend 
the incidence of PE in the patients with COVID-19, and to ascertain 
the exact pathophysiological mechanisms involved.

Further, our case tested positive for lupus anticoagulant. Zhang 
et al.11 recently reported three COVID-19 cases with presence 
of thrombotic phenomena (multiple cerebral infarctions) and 
antiphospholipid antibodies. However, the cases were negative 
for lupus anticoagulant, but positive for anti-cardiolipin IgA and 
anti–β
2-glycoprotein-I IgA and IgG antibodies.

Non-enhanced chest CT is considered to be the first-line imaging 
tool for evaluation of COVID-19 pneumonia3. Some ancillary 
findings on non-enhanced CT, such as peripheral lung opacities 
with features suggestive of pulmonary infarction (reversed halo 
sign/central lucencies), dilatation of pulmonary trunk, and increased 
cardiac volume (particularly, enlargement of right cardiac chamber) 
should indicate risk of PE12. These aspects, as observed in our patient, 
may aid in the decision to perform CT pulmonary angiography to 
confirm or exclude PE. Moreover, clinical parameters, including 
elevated D-dimer levels, hemoptysis, and sudden worsening of 
respiratory function or chest pain should also be considered3,9.
Additionally, signs of right heart strain on electrocardiogram or 
echocardiogram may help in identifying patients with COVID-19 at 
risk of concurrent PE9. Whereas, contraindications associated with 
the use of intravenous iodinated contrast media, including allergy 
(prior allergy-like reaction to iodinated contrast medium) and renal 
dysfunction, should be weighed in the decision to perform CTPA3,9.

In conclusion, we should be aware of the association between 
COVID-19 and acute PE, and consider the clinical and laboratory 
findings as well as non-enhanced chest CT features (if performed) 
in the decision to perform a CTPA scan for patients infected with 
the novel coronavirus.
