Publication status: Preprint has been published in a journal as an article
DOI of the published article: https://doi.org/10.1590/0102-469841747t
ON METHODOLOGY AND METHODS FOR ANALYSING
CLASSROOM DISCURSIVE ‎INTERACTION: A ‎DISCUSSION
‎BETWEEN QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE ‎APPROACHES ‎
Leonardo Goncalves Lago
https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.5052
Submitted on: 2022-11-10
Posted on: 2022-11-16 (version 1)
(YYYY-MM-DD)
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTIGO 
 
SOBRE METODOLOGIA E MÉTODOS PARA ANÁLISE DA INTERAÇÃO DISCURSIVA EM 
SALA DE AULA: UMA DISCUSSÃO ENTRE ABORDAGENS QUANTITATIVA E 
QUALITATIVA  
 
LEONARDO LAGO 
Universidade de Cambridge, Cambridge, Reino Unido. <lago@alumni.usp.br> 
ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3143-1757 
 
  
RESUMO: Esse artigo apresenta um trabalho teórico cujo objetivo é a discussão de metodologias e 
métodos para a pesquisa educacional, em particular aquelas que analisam as interações discursivas que 
ocorrem em sala de aula. A primeira parte discorre sobre os dois principais paradigmas de pesquisa e suas 
bases ontológicas e epistemológicas: o positivismo e o interpretivismo. A seguir,  dois métodos para 
análise das interações discursivas são apresentados e discutidos, um para cada paradigma. A codificação 
sistemática - dentro do contexto quantitativo - é indicada para tratar dados provenientes de grandes 
amostras, para a descrição de padrões gerais e, ao transformar o discurso em variáveis, poder ser utilizada 
para comparações estatísticas entre grupos ou análises temporais. O método é aplicado em um conjunto 
de 42 episódios de diálogo em grupo e os resultados discutidos à luz da natureza das perguntas de 
pesquisa, mostrando-se quais tipos de testes estatísticos podem ser realizados. Dentro do paradigma 
interpretivista, apresenta-se a análise do discurso sociocultural para exemplo de método qualitativo. O 
método é aplicado a trechos de diálogos de sala de aula em que o resultado é a identificação de tipologias 
que descrevem as formas em que professor e alunos constroem explicações científicas. Na parte final do 
trabalho, as possibilidades e limites de cada método são discutidas e na conclusão se defende a tese de 
que ambos são complementares para o avanço do conhecimento no campo educacional. 
 
Palavras-chave: interações discursivas, metodologia, paradigmas de pesquisa, codificação sistemática, 
análise do discurso sociocultural. 
 
  
ON METHODOLOGY AND METHODS FOR ANALYSING CLASSROOM DISCURSIVE INTERACTION: A 
DISCUSSION BETWEEN QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE APPROACHES  
  
ABSTRACT: This article presents a theoretical work whose objective is the discussion of methodologies 
and methods in educational research, in particular those that analyze classroom discursive interactions. 
The first part discusses the two main research paradigms and their ontological and epistemological bases: 
positivism and interpretivism. Next, two methods for analyzing discursive interactions are presented and 
discussed, one for each paradigm. Systematic coding - within the quantitative context - is indicated to 
treat data from large samples, to describe general patterns and, by transforming the discourse into 
variables, to statistical comparisons or temporal analyses. The method is applied in a set of 42 episodes 
of group dialogue and the results are discussed in light of the nature of the research questions, showing 
what types of statistical tests can be performed. Within the interpretivist paradigm,  sociocultural 
discourse analysis is presented as an example of qualitative method an it is applied to excerpts from 
classroom dialogues. The main finding is the identification of typologies that describe the ways in which 
teacher and students construct scientific explanations. In the final part, some possibilities and limits of 
each method are discussed and the conclusion defendes that both can be seen as complementary for the 
advancement of knowledge in the educational field. 
  
Keywords: discursive interactions, methodology, research paradigms, systematic coding, sociocultural  
discourse analysis. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.5052
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 SOBRE METODOLOGÍA Y MÉTODOS PARA EL ANÁLISIS DE LA INTERACCIÓN DISCURSIVA EN EL 
AULA: UNA DISCUSIÓN ENTRE LOS ENFOQUES CUANTITATIVO Y CUALITATIVO 
  
RESUMEN: Este artículo presenta un trabajo teórico cuyo objetivo es la discusión de metodologías y 
métodos para la investigación educativa, en particular aquellos que analizan las interacciones discursivas 
que ocurren en el aula. La primera parte discute los dos principales paradigmas de investigación y sus 
bases ontológicas y epistemológicas: el positivismo y el interpretativismo. A continuación, se presentan y 
discuten dos métodos para analizar interacciones discursivas, uno para cada paradigma. La codificación 
sistemática -dentro del contexto cuantitativo- está indicada para tratar datos de grandes muestras, 
describir patrones generales y, al transformar el discurso en variables, puede utilizarse para comparaciones 
estadísticas entre grupos o análisis temporales. El método se aplica a un conjunto de 42 episodios de 
diálogo grupal y los resultados se discuten a la luz de la naturaleza de las preguntas de investigación, 
mostrando qué tipos de pruebas estadísticas se pueden realizar. Dentro del paradigma interpretativo, el 
análisis del discurso sociocultural se presenta como un ejemplo de método cualitativo. El método se 
aplica a extractos de diálogos de aula en los que el resultado es la identificación de tipologías que describen 
las formas en que el profesor y los estudiantes construyen explicaciones científicas. En la parte final del 
trabajo se discuten las posibilidades y límites de cada método y en la conclusión se defiende la tesis de 
que ambos son complementarios para el avance del conocimiento en el campo educativo. 
  
Palabras clave: interacciones discursivas, metodología, paradigmas de investigación, codificación 
sistemática, análisis del discurso sociocultural. 
 
  
INTRODUCTION 
Much research has focused on the role of language and discursive interaction in the 
knowledge-building process in classroom-based settings (Howe & Mercer, 2007; Mercer et al., 2020; 
Resnick et al., 2015; Schwarz & Baker, 2016). In the last 40 years, this research field has flourished under 
umbrella terms such as ‘classroom dialogue’ or ‘dialogic teaching’ (Kim & Wilkinson, 2019; Mercer & 
Dawes, 2014), encapsulating studies that aim to effectively use discursive interactions in the teaching 
context (Alexander, 2008). This stance in the educational field has been called ‘dialogic turn’, emphasising 
students’ voice, agency, and participation in the co-construction of knowledge (Wilkinson & Son, 2011). 
The first large-scale study on classroom dialogue was probably Flanders’s (1970), who 
depicted the two-thirds rule; that is, in regular classes, two-thirds of the time is filled by talk; two-thirds 
of this talk is teacher’s talk, and two-thirds of this teacher’s talk is lecturing. Another relevant finding is 
framed in the triadic discourse: initiation, response, and feedback or evaluation (Mehan, 1979; Sinclair & 
Coulthard, 1975). This pattern is possibly the most common feature in whole-class talk and can account 
for up to 70% of all teacher-student interactions (Cazden, 1988; Nassaji & Wells, 2000; Wells, 1993). 
Although much of these studies have taken place in Anglo-Saxon countries, this pattern is recognised 
worldwide (Alexander, 2001). 
Interventionist research has investigated and identified forms of enhanced teacher-student 
interactions that support teaching and learning (e.g., Mercer, 2002). Perhaps the main conclusion is that 
forms of talking have profound implications for what is made available to learn (Howe & Mercer, 2007; 
Kelly, 2014; Lemke, 2001); “the quality of student learning is closely linked to the quality of classroom 
talk” (Nystrand, 1997, p. 29). 
More recently, review books on methods for analysing classroom dialogue have been 
published (Kershner, Hennessy, et al., 2020; Kumpulainen et al., 2009; Märtsin, 2012). Contributing to 
this proliferating field of research, the proposal of this discussion paper is to reflect on the methodologies 
and methods to analyse classroom discursive interaction. However, instead of directly departing to 
analytical methods, it is firstly offered a broad methodological discussion starting from research 
paradigms that considers elements such as epistemology and ontology. In the second part of this paper, 
methods and procedures for discursive data analysis are presented in two veins: quantitative and 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.5052
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
qualitative approaches. Both methods are discussed and illustrated based on examples from previous 
research. 
 
RESEARCH PARADIGM: A ONE-WAY RELATIONSHIP 
There is a usual view that relates methodology with the selection of methods (techniques) 
for a study and their application for data analysis. However, a far more comprehensive notion of 
methodology comprises the researcher’s attachment to different epistemological and theoretical 
traditions that influence not only the selection of methods, but also the framing of research questions 
and design (Mercer et al., 2004; Taber, 2012, 2013; Treagust et al., 2014). 
Crotty (1998) argues that a research conceptualisation should entail four elements: 
epistemology, theoretical perspective, methodology, and methods. Taber (2013) considers similar 
elements when referring to ontological and epistemological assumptions in research: theoretical 
perspective, methodology, research design, and the coherent employment of techniques for acquiring 
and analysing data. 
These elements jointly create what is often called the research paradigm, a worldview or basic 
belief that sets the value of research and guides the investigator not only in the choice of methods but 
also in some fundamental assumptions (Guba & Lincoln, 1994; Treagust et al., 2014). In other words, 
the research paradigm is seen as a ‘reference point’, ‘vision’, or ‘philosophy’ that amalgamates beliefs, 
values, and methodologies in research (Taber, 2013; Treagust et al., 2014). In practice, paradigms are how 
the researcher thinks about and makes sense of their study.  
Different paradigms can employ very contrasting aspects, most fundamentally when 
considering the two broadest perspectives. The first paradigm is positivist, nomothetic, and 
confirmatory, which means that it deals with definitive and objective knowledge, seeks general patterns 
or laws, and tests hypotheses. The underlying assumption is that “it is possible to report unambiguous 
truth, in terms of observable phenomena and verified facts” (Taber, 2013, p. 49). Guba and Lincoln 
(1994) pointed out that this approach is grounded in realistic ontology and objectivist epistemology. 
Realistic ontology entails that “an apprehendable reality is assumed to exist, driven by immutable natural 
laws and mechanisms” (p. 109), whereas an objectivist epistemology assumes that “the investigator and 
the investigated ‘object’ are assumed to be independent entities, and the investigator to be capable of 
studying the object without influencing it or being influenced by it.” (p. 110). This approach to social 
science is deemed objectivist and determinist because it sees human beings as products of the 
environment and responses to it (Cohen et al., 2007). 
In more detail, positivist research “strives for objectivity, measurability, predictability, 
controllability, patterning, the construction of laws and rules of behaviour” and seeks causal explanations 
to produce claims (Cohen et al., 2007, p. 26; Treagust et al., 2014). Within this context, quantitative 
methods are more aligned with such a perspective, trying to capture social reality through predesigned 
categories and measurements as well as providing causal-effect explanations. 
The second paradigm is interpretivist, idiographic and involving discovery. As knowledge 
(or nature) is viewed as an inherently subjective human interpretation, this paradigm focuses on specific 
and contextual cases. It deals with “meanings that those participating in educational situations give to 
what they experience” (Taber, 2013, p. 52). Researchers under this paradigm believe that meanings are 
not pregiven but co-created through interaction. Therefore, they might engage with participants in 
activities and seek their views (Treagust et al., 2014). Guba and Lincoln (1994) said that this approach is 
grounded in a relativist ontology and subjectivist epistemology. Relativist ontology conceives that 
“realities are apprehendable in the form of multiple, intangible mental constructions, socially and 
experientially based” (p. 110). In contrast, a subjectivist epistemology denotes that “the investigator and 
the object of investigation are assumed to be interactively linked so that the ‘findings’ are created as the 
investigation proceeds” (p. 111). In this approach, human beings are seen as agents of their own actions 
and producers of their own environment. Because of this, this perspective is deemed subjectivist and 
voluntarist (Cohen et al., 2007).  
Thus, interpretive researchers “strive to understand and interpret the world in terms of its 
actors” (Cohen et al., 2007, p. 26) and frame the situated meaning of human experience (Treagust et al., 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.5052
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2014). Employing mainly qualitative methods, such tradition interprets social situations when 
constructing meanings from the data. 
There is criticism about both paradigms. Positivist researchers might be seen as superficial 
and limiting, as they do not grasp the inner contradictions and assume that the same finding or solutions 
can be applied in every context (Taber, 2013). At the same time, interpretivist studies have sometimes 
been critiqued for being anecdotal or not methodically rigorous, resulting in a lack of generalisation or 
scalability. 
Notwithstanding the above, some researchers consider critical theory to be a third research 
paradigm (Cohen et al., 2007; Guba & Lincoln, 1994; Treagust et al., 2014). Researchers following this 
tradition emphasise the political and ideological stances in human interaction, arguing that factors such 
as power and inequality shape and forge the ways that human beings live, behave and perceive reality 
(Cohen et al., 2007).  
The existence of many research paradigms might not be a problem in itself, especially in 
educational research. Treagust and colleagues (2014) advocate that this diversity promotes the 
construction of more balanced knowledge and broader effort. In same position, Taber (2013) 
acknowledges that any paradigm has strengths and limitations, thus any of them can produce valuable 
knowledge and can be employed in complementary ways.  
At this point at least three aspects must be considered in relation to the adoption of a research 
paradigm. First, it must provide a consistent and coherent account across every step of the study (Taber, 
2013, p. 55). Second, different paradigms have different purposes and methods that must lead to different 
outcomes (p. 68). Third, and finally, any study refers to a paradigm, if it is not explicit, it is implicit in the 
manner that the research questions are framed and addressed (p. 68). These concerns stress the 
importance of thinking carefully on the relationship between the research aims and the most 
appropriate methods to find them.  
Surely, all paradigms can be applied and generate new knowledge when analysing classroom 
interaction. For instance, the positivist approach demands simplification of social practices to make 
research manageable; in general, selecting a set of dialogue variables and controlling others one related to 
learning outcomes (Asterhan et al., 2020). It is such a method that allows us to state something about 
how dialogic teaching affects students' learning. On the other side, the interpretivist paradigm might 
provide a more nuanced frame on the dynamics of dialogue through, for example, ethnographic case 
studies that stretch the cultural context of the classroom setting (Asterhan et al., 2020). However, as said 
above, different methods are required for each paradigm when addressing research questions of different 
natures. Ultimately, this is exactly the aim of this discussion paper. 
For didactic purposes, the next sections are divided into quantitative or qualitative 
methods. For each of them, there is a brief presentation of one analytical procedure and its application to 
real classroom discursive data from a previous project. The research questions and findings are presented 
here just as an exemplary model of operationalising paradigms and methods. Thus, the goal is not to 
discuss the new knowledge on dialogic teaching generated from this data. 
 
METHODS FOR DISCURSIVE DATA ANALYSIS: A QUANTITATIVE AND 
QUALITATIVE COMPARISON 
First of all, analysing discursive interaction is an inherently subjective exercise of building 
meaning from the thoughts and voices of others, which are constrained and affected by social, 
cultural, and situated contexts. Such analytical process involves a great deal of interpretation as it relates 
to reflexivity; researchers bring their own preconceptions, interests, biases, agenda, and so on (Cohen et 
al., 2007). 
Researchers have also discussed competing tensions between ‘deductive’ and ‘inductive’ 
approaches in analysing data (Evans, 2013; Taber, 2013). While the former looks for evidence in relation 
to pre-established themes, which undoubtedly steers analysis, the latter stems from open-minded inquiry, 
generates themes from the data and uses them as an analytical tool (Evans, 2013). In other words, the 
analysis can be drawn from the conceptual framework or be grounded in data (Taber, 2013), but both 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.5052
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cases involve instances of creating categories, grouping them under higher-order headings, and 
formulating a general description of the research topic (Elo & Kyngäs, 2008).  
Despite there being many approaches to analyse discursive data and interaction, it might be 
argued that all of them assume that the researcher must “reflect on them [data] repeatedly and at length, 
to be able to fragment and manipulate them in the search for underlying patterns and meanings” (Evans, 
2013, p. 158). The extension in which the data is fragmented may define the use of quantitative or 
qualitative methods. It is considered that when analysing discursive interaction, in most cases there is a 
moment in which the researcher will categorise or ‘code’ an utterance, turn of speech or episode 
(Hennessy et al., 2020). 
Below, two examples are provided. The first is an illustration of a quantitative analysis 
regarding small-group dialogue during seven different tasks. The second is a qualitative analysis carried 
out in episodes of whole-class teaching about the topic of evaporation. 
 
Quantitative approach to discursive data: systematic coding 
In this section, we focus on the systematic coding method, as it is the most popular among 
researchers and examines interaction as a turn-taking system and categorises each of them. Within this 
method, the analytic process of discursive data involves the reduction of the data through the marking of 
relevant points about what is looked for. Very frequently, this procedure is called ‘coding’ and enables 
the researcher to “organise and structure the data” at the same time that “translate raw data into particular 
conceptual references” and then “identify links to the different categories” (Evans, 2013, pp. 158–159). 
Objectivity is a key aspect of systematic coding as it encompasses the development of a scheme that 
needs to be unambiguous; that is, the criteria for coding must be clear enough so that different observers 
assign the same code/category to the discursive unit (Galton et al., 1980). Quite frequently, codes come 
from a theoretical framework or previous research. In this case, this research may be labelled as ‘template’ 
since the analytical framework is informed by the theoretical perspective, “so that the analyst knows just 
what they are looking for in  the data from the start” (Robson, 2002; Taber, 2013, p. 293). 
When the codes' occurrences are counted, such a method provides a broad overview of data 
sample and allows the establishment of patterns within and across events (Snell & Lefstein, 2011). 
However, this technique is not free of problematic issues, as there is a trend to fragment the data and 
lose context or other meanings that are not captured in the codes (Cohen et al., 2007). Therefore, 
systematic coding might be seen as reductionist (Mercer et al., 2004; Snell & Lefstein, 2011). The next 
subsection shows an example of the kinds of research questions and findings that systematic coding 
might provide. 
 
Material and method 
In the research reported in Author (XXXX), there were three questions about group-work 
interaction, more specifically; 1) How can small-group dialogue in a Brazilian primary school 
be characterised? 2) How did it change over the course of the intervention? and; 3) Did the groups 
become more dialogic ?
 For context, the research project was based on a teacher professional 
development programme to promote dialogic talk both in small-group work and whole-class teaching. 
In total, 42 episodes of group talk were recorded, transcribed, and analysed. Due to the size 
sample and the nature of the questions, a quantitative analysis would be the most reasonable approach 
to find the general pattern of the discursive interaction that emerged in the groups and how such a pattern 
has potentially changed over time.  
A coding scheme was devised based on previous works from the literature and comprised a 
set of ten codes relevant to dialogic classroom talk at the utterance level. The resulting scheme contained 
ten categories divided into three contexts: content, task and off-topic that discriminate the utterance’s 
tenor. That is, the codes can be arranged to distinguish if the utterance is related to the content proposed 
in the task (topic under discussion); if it is related to task procedures or class management; or, ultimately, 
if it is off-topic, talk neither focused on content nor task (Table 1). 
 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.5052
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Code 
Definition and Examples 
Content 
1. Invitation 
(INV) 
K = .57 
Request for facts, beliefs and opinion (without grounds) among others. 
Examples: ‘How many ideas does the group have?’, ‘What are your ideas?’, ‘What is 
going on, here?’, ‘Does water evaporate?’. 
2. Dialogic 
invitation 
(D_INV) 
K = .80 
Request for reasoning, reflecting, speculating, building on, positioning, clarifying, 
referencing back or beyond, agreement or consensus.  
Examples: ‘Why?’, ‘How do know this?’, ‘What else?’, ‘Do you agree?’, ‘But, the 
room is totally closed and neither air or heat can get in’.  
3. Contribution 
(CON) 
K = .78 
Lecturing, stating facts or examples, stating opinions or expressing ideas 
without grounds.  
Examples: ‘Heat and wind’, ‘It evaporates’, ‘Evaporation’. 
4. Dialogic 
contribution 
(D_CON) 
K = .71 
Current or previous contribution followed by reasoning, expanding, 
elaboration, building on, referencing back or beyond. 
Examples: ‘Because the wind blows and makes dries it’, ‘Vapour rises up and makes 
clouds’. 
5. Follow-up  
(FOL) 
K = .73 
Quick evaluations, simple reactions, agreement, disagreement, and 
interjections used as a filter that functions to keep the flow. 
Examples: ‘I see’, ‘Right’, ‘Yes’, ‘No’, ‘Okay’, ‘Me too’, ‘Yes, that is it’. 
6. Dialogic 
evaluation   
(D_EVA) 
K = .62 
Assess status of answer by stating it is wrong and must be followed by 
grounds (reasons, evidences or elaboration).  
Examples: ‘No, because the wind makes the water moist and the sun turns it in 
smoke’, ‘You are wrong, the water evaporates, it turns into tiny droplets that form all 
the clouds’. 
Task 
7. Instruction 
(INS) 
K = .85 
When conveying task procedures, classroom management or behaviour 
controlling; one tells another one to carry out some action. 
Examples: ‘Go’, ‘It is me’, ‘Your turn’, ‘She writes’, ‘Is it your turn?’, ‘Write down’, 
‘Grab the pen’, ‘Can I borrow your rubber?’ 
Off-topic 
8. Off-topic 
(OFF) 
K = .90 
Interaction not related to the topic under discussion (content) or the task. It includes 
personal critiques. 
Examples of topics: nails, hair, friend, travel, go out, handwriting, jokes  
9. Other (OTH) 
K = .57 
Interaction not covered by none of the other codes. It includes incomplete 
sentences that it is hard to grasp a clear meaning. 
Examples: ‘It evaporates because’, ‘The wind, it’, ‘I thought a better one’. 
10. Inaudible 
(INA)  
K = 1.00 
Interaction is either inaudible or indeciferable.  
Examples: See notation in the transcript (ina) 
Table 1. Coding scheme comprised of ten codes: description and examples (The numbers in the first column are the 
Cohen’s Kappa scores of the interrater reability).  
 
The utterances that are related to the task content were classified regarding their discursive 
functions inspired in the IRF pattern and based on the dialogic features that describe productive talk 
(Howe et al., 2019). Thus, it was generated created six codes, two for each move of the triadic discourse: 
invitation (INV), dialogic invitation (D_INV), contribution (CON), dialogic contribution 
(D_CON), follow-up (FOL) and dialogic evaluation (D_EVA). This distinction was made only 
for content utterances because they are the medium in which knowledge construction and conceptual 
learning happen. 
The use of the term 'dialogic' tries to frame the utterances in which participants 
make significant contributions by moving ideas forward through critically taking account of others’ 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.5052
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
perspectives in building knowledge collectively (Kershner, Dowdall, et al., 2020; Mercer, 2003). Given 
the research interest, engagement in dialogic talk was operationalised by relatively frequent occurrences 
of the three dialogic codes.  
To conclude, this scheme made it possible to describe classroom talk and evaluate dialogicity; 
both goals were at the core of the research questions. Classroom talk could be described by comparing 
the relative code occurrences within each context (content, instruction, off-topic) and dialogicity 
evaluated by considering the frequency of dialogic utterances in relation to simple ones.  
This kind of positivist coding assumes that the codes can capture components or 
characteristics of the discursive interaction. Thus, aiming objectivism, the coding scheme was tested for 
inter-reliability purposes. Three Masters students to join the researcher in piloting and refine the scheme, 
establish coding rules, and achieve consistency.  
In the first round, all raters coded the same group-talk episode and discussed the scheme and 
rules for alignment and convergence. After moderate scores were obtained, the scheme was simplified 
by dropping some codes, and rules were clarified and written in more detail. Two raters coded 28% of 
the episodes (12 out of 42), and inter-rater reliability was calculated using Cohen’s Kappa scores through 
R (RStudio team, 2020). After the iterative process, an acceptable/excellent level of agreement was 
accomplished, as Cohen’s Kappa scores averaged K = .79 (Kappa values for each code are presented in 
Table 1). Then, the researcher finally coded the rest of the material .This procedure makes the scheme 
reliable. 
 
Results 
In addressing the first research question, the result is presented considering the entire dataset. 
Firstly, group talk as a whole was considered, and relative code frequencies measured the number of 
content-related (codes 1 to 6), instruction-related (code 7), and off-topic utterances (code 8) divided by 
the sum of all of them. Figure 1 shows that groups spent almost half (56%) of the utterances talking 
about the content of the task, around one-quarter negotiating the task-instruction (25%), and a reasonable 
number off-topic (19%). Only half of group work was devoted to content, which is the kind of talk was 
more directly related to conceptual-disciplinary learning gains. 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Small-group talk divided among the three contexts. 
 
The data could be further explored by searching for variations in the codes’ frequencies 
across tasks (question 2) and using statistical analysis to find significant variances. The dataset was 
consistent for non-parametric tests to compare three or more populations (Fligner-Killeen’s test was 
above the significance level for all but the D_EVA code when comparing tasks or groups, p > 0.05). This 
result allowed non-parametric tests to analyse comparisons among groups employing the Kruskal-Wallis 
test and the post-hoc Nemenyi test. The ‘other’ and ‘inaudible’ codes were discarded and not considered 
for analysis. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.5052
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 shows code distributions for contexts of group talk as a whole and discursive 
functions across tasks. Only a small number of significant differences between groups were found. For 
instance, the analysis for context showed a significant difference in content (H(6) = 17.575, p = .007) 
between Tasks 3–4 (p = .037) and Tasks 3–5 (p = .022), as well as in off-topic (H(6) = 14.007, p = 
.029) between Tasks 3-5 (p = .046). No difference was found in instruction. Broadly speaking, students 
talked more about the content and less off-topic in Tasks 2 and 3.  
 
 Figure 2: Variation of the three contexts of talk across tasks.  
 
In order to answer whether the groups became more dialogic (question 3), it was compared 
the aggregated results for non-dialogic utterances (the sum-up of codes 1, 3 and 5) with those considered 
dialogic (codes 2, 4 and 6). As the dialogic and non-dialogic measures are mirrored images, it suffices to 
conduct the statistical analysis for just one of them.  
There are just three task-pairs that show significant differences (H(6) = 24.881, p < .001); 
tasks 1-2 (p = .008), tasks 2-6 (p = .001) and tasks 4-6 (p = .04). In Figure 3, it can be seen that tasks 2 
was the most dialogic, followed by task 4, while tasks 1 and 6 showed moves with more non-dialogic 
utterances. Therefore, the hypothesis of enhancing the use of dialogic utterances throughout tasks was 
not confirmed. There were only a few differences between tasks that cannot be classified as an effect of 
the intervention. 
 
 
Figure 3: Variation of dialogicity across tasks. 
0.45
0.60
0.66
0.43
0.42
0.57
0.56
0.26
0.27
0.22
0.29
0.23
0.19
0.20
0.29
0.13
0.12
0.28
0.35
0.24
0.24
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Task
Context
Content
Instruction
Off-topic
0.76
0.52
0.72
0.60
0.63
0.78
0.65
0.24
0.48
0.28
0.40
0.37
0.22
0.35
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Task
Dialogicity
Non-Dialogic
Dialogic
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.5052
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It is worth noting that these findings on classroom interaction were obtained without 
presenting any discursive extract to the reader. In some cases, researchers present just a small extract to 
illustrate the scheme application and not as part of the analysis itself. Thus, the result is totally based on 
the explanatory power of the codes and on the reliability of the coding process. Moreover, considering 
the nature of the questions, it is clear that a qualitative approach would neither offer the generalisation 
for the description nor objectivism to compare the change in the discursive variables over time.   
For example, Extract 1 shows an example of dialogic talk that did emerge in these groups: 
a episode carefully selected to illustrate how students interacted in high levels of dialogicity. The 
identification of such episode among the others was only possible after the systematic codification and 
frequency counting of the entire dataset. Quantitatively, more than half of the utterances was considered 
dialogic (17 out of 30; around 57%). For a brief comparison, the average of the dialogicity across the 
seven tasks was something around 33% (Figure 3).  
 
     Extract 1. Small-group talk: dialogic talk 
Line 
Speaker 
Utterances 
Code 
96 
S43 
I'd rather buy a new toy than tell the truth... otherwise the girl would get mad at 
me... and... 
D_CON 
97 
S47 
Look here... but like... no... friend... you have to say to buy a new one and return 
it... and be quiet... 
INS 
98 
S46 
But you're going to buy a toy... 
CON 
99 
S47 
There is no such alternative... it is to buy a new toy and return it without saying 
anything or apologizing... 
D_CON 
100 
S43 
So... but I as said... I’d prefer to buy a new toy instead of telling the truth, because 
later... 
CON 
101 
S47 
We know what you want, but what's the reason? 
D_INV 
102 
S46 
And… why do you have to buy a new toy and not to tell the truth? 
D_INV 
103 
S43 
Because if I tell the truth, sometimes my friend may not want to be my friend 
anymore because I lost her toy... 
D_CON 
104 
S6 
Ahhhh ok... 
FOL 
105 
S43 
I thought so... 
FOL 
106 
S47 
I’d say that it was an accident and it wasn't my fault... because… like, you can keep 
your friendship with the girl... and still tell the truth... but if you buy a new toy, 
return it and tell the truth, you will be like guilty... 
D_CON 
107 
S43 
But at least you gave her a new toy and apologized 
D_CON 
108 
S47 
Yeah... but I think we'd better tell the truth... imagine... 
CON 
109 
S43 
Will you lie to her, then? 
INV 
110 
S47 
Look... like... you borrow a doll from her, then, all of a sudden... you're going to 
dry the doll's hair like that... with the blow dryer and suddenly it goes all black 
here... 
D_CON 
111 
S46 
Burn it 
CON 
112 
S47 
Burn it... there... like, it's like you lost it... there... 
D_CON 
113 
S47 
Then! S43, think... then you take the doll and lose it... or burn its hair 
D_CON 
114 
S43 
But do you think it's right to say that it's a lie... to say that you lost it? 
INV 
115 
S47 
Then you go there and buy a doll just like it... and say… take it... then... you like... 
Will she continue to be my friend? You will be lying to her... 
D_CON 
116 
S43 
But I ruined her doll and at least I won't feel guilty since I returned the doll to 
her... 
D_CON 
117 
S47 
But you have to tell the truth... or are you a liar? 
INV 
118 
S46 
Or we can add both of them... buy a new toy, say that it was an accident and that 
it wasn’t our fault  
D_CON 
119 
S 
It's... 
OTH 
120 
S46 
It might be...? Do you agree? 
D_INV 
121 
S43 
No... 
FOL 
122 
S47 
So… convince us that there is a better one? 
D_INV 
123 
S43 
If I buy her a new toy... the same way, I lost the toy... like... the same way if she 
lost a toy of mine and bought another one, the same way, I wouldn't know that a 
toy of mine had been lost... 
D_CON 
124 
S46 
But then you would lie to her? 
D_INV 
125 
S43 
I prefer to return the new toy... 
CON 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.5052
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Qualitative approach to discursive data: sociocultural discourse 
Qualitative methods underpinned by the interpretivism paradigm usually take into account 
the cultural and social context and practices that shape the classroom interaction (e.g., Gee & Green, 
1998). It is said that the knowledge is socially constructed through language. These methods can include 
linguistic ethnography, sociolinguistics, discourse analysis among others (Hennessy et al., 2020). In most 
cases, they stress the contextual and sociocultural dimensions rather than the verbal exchange per se (turn-
taking) mainly because discourse is framed in a broad sense: "the text (speech, writing, or image), the 
discursive practice of analysis within the text, and the social practices and structures bound to notions of 
power and knowledge." (Gregory, 2020). 
Researchers dealing with discursive data and qualitative methods employ a variety of 
procedures such as identifying themes, generating units, classifying and categorising these 
units, structuring narratives to describe content, interpreting scenarios and constructing theory (Cohen 
et al., 2007; Robson, 2002). 
As an example of qualitative method, sociocultural discourse analysis is presented and 
applied to trace relationships between classroom interaction and conceptual learning. Such analysis 
consisted of closely examining the episodes aiming at generating categories and illustrating them with 
selected extracts. This focus enabled researchers to search not simply for a specific discursive function 
but to investigate whole forms of interactions that can be used to generate typologies and evaluate their 
impact on particular educational purposes. In addition, this method deals with language “content, 
function, and the ways shared understanding is developed in social context, over time” (Mercer, 2010, p. 
9). 
One of the strengths of sociocultural discourse analysis is that “the actual talk remains the 
data throughout the analysis and so the processes of the joint construction of knowledge can be examined 
in detail” (Mercer, 2004, p. 143). Thus, here, the focus is not the discursive functions or the language 
itself but the content of talk and the pursuit of joint intellectual activity (Mercer, 2004). It is an inductive 
approach to inquiry from which themes or categories should emerge from the data (Evans, 2013; Taber, 
2013).  
Such analysis is often illustrated by selected extracts followed by a commentary with 
reference to prior knowledge of both the field and the context. It can be concerned with the syntax and 
the cohesive structure of language to represent the ways that knowledge is socially built in the classroom 
(Mercer, 2004). As dialogue remains untouchable throughout the analysis, the emerged typologies offer 
a heuristic device for making sense of the talk in relation to one particular issue (Mercer, 2004). For 
instance, Mercer’s studies identified three types of group talk: disputational, cumulative, and exploratory; 
and verified that this last have a positive impact on student learning. Thus, the point is not to reduce the 
data to a categorical tally, but set broad features that involve the context and the discursive dynamic 
regarding an educational learning goal (Mercer et al., 2004). The next subsection shows an example of 
the kind of research questions and finding that sociocultural discourse analysis might provide. 
 
Material and method 
Again, the data comes from the same previous project that consisted of a classroom-based 
intervention to promote dialogue. The second module of the TPD programme was based on a predefined 
classroom material that included a considerable amount of student talking and thinking while allowing 
students to develop their own theories about water evaporation based on observations and everyday 
experiences (SPRinG, n.d.). 
A research question proposed to investigate how classroom talk supported students’ 
scientific understanding. It was argued that much of the conceptual learning in primary science occurs 
through the construction of explanations. Thus, the point here was to frame and analyse how teachers 
and students jointly construct the scientific explanation of evaporation through talk. 
However, defining what counts as an explanation or framing its structure is not an easy task, 
despite the consensus in taking it as an intellectual elaboration that accounts for a cause-effect relationship 
and uses a logical connective like ‘because’ connecting the cause and the result. Within this perspective, 
the corpus of data was read to search for structures that resemble scientific explanations. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.5052
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Considering the interpretivism nature of this analysis and the specificities of the study 
(primary science, scientific discourse and evaporation), a further framework was required during the data 
interrogation. Basically, it was required to define 'what counts as an explanation in classroom talk 
within primary science'. Very briefly, looking at the data and theory reiteratively, two structural aspects 
was set: forms of explanations and causation (Braaten & Windschitl, 2011). Thus, the analysis would 
search for sequences of utterances that convey instances of explanation (definitions, descriptions, and 
reasoning) and causation (cause-effect accounts of an observable event). Finding examples of these 
occurrences might make it possible to generate typologies, comment on and describe them, and discuss 
potential outcomes.  
 
Results 
Thus, the data corpus was analysed in order to select instances of explanations being built as 
a collective activity between teachers and students. In the 18 episodes of whole-class teaching recorded 
in this module, five types of explanatory sequences were elaborated and arranged into three broad 
discursive acts depending on whether teachers were exploring, guiding, or providing an explanation. 
No clear, straightforward distinction exists between the sequences of exploring and guiding 
explanations as real classroom interactions have unplanned utterances, deviations, and uncontrolled flows 
that make it hard to frame the sequences under a single category (Barnes, 1976). Thus, these kinds of 
explanatory sequences  should not be taken as neat or crystalline; different categories overlap in some 
utterances. Mercer (1995) already raised this concern when he proposed the three kinds of group talk. 
Whereas ‘exploring explanations’ involved advancing, extending, and adding to students’ 
ideas, ‘guiding explanations’ marked sequences headed towards the scientific explanation, including an 
effort to use scientific terms more precisely. These two categories were further divided into four granular 
typologies. Finally, ‘providing explanations’ labelled sequences in which the teacher delivered an 
explanation to the students. In this sample of talk-intensive lessons, this kind of direct telling was 
highly interactive, and students contributed with some words, but the teacher did most of the conceptual 
development. 
The full research report (Author, XXXX) discusses these forms of collective construction 
while proposing a framework of reference to each typology, providing examples from lessons, and 
commenting on them. In this paper, for a matter of space and scope, I opt to illustrate and discuss only 
one of these typologies; guiding explanations through response narrowing. 
Here, two extracts illustrate the excessive use of cued elicitation (Mercer, 1995) and Socratic 
questioning (Roth, 1996), respectively; that is, the use of limiting invitations that constrain the discourse 
to a narrow line of reasoning. Students just needed to give a few-word response to follow the explanation 
across the scientific point of view. In the first case, the lesson aim was to compare water and perfume 
evaporation. As students could not see or feel the water evaporating, the perfume played the role of 
showing that something was leaving the water and spreading into the air. The teacher developed this 
reasoning (Extract 2). 
In the teacher’s third move (line 82), she used a strong intonation (“SEE”) to reject 
a student’s answer. In the following move (line 84), she reinforced the right answer with a justification: 
“We don’t see them, these particles are tiny, they are invisible”. In the same turn, she asked about the 
reason for bringing the perfume to the classroom. Knowing that the visual effect was not the answer, a 
student argued about the feeling.  
Although this was a why-question, there was so much indication of the correct answer that 
it was not coded as a dialogic invitation. Then, in lines 87 and 88, the teacher developed a largely complete 
explanation, leaving only a final word unsaid for student completion—‘vapour’. Having this expected 
response, she moved on with the explanation relating vapour, the scent, and its spreading around the 
room. It was an explanatory construction, despite the narrow, inducing line of reasoning that the teacher 
pursued. 
 
 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.5052
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Extract 2. Whole-class: Guiding explanations through responses narrowing 
Line 
Speaker 
Utterances 
 
77 
T 
What is similar in the disappearance of the handprint on the blackboard and in the 
perfume? 
 
78 
S 
Both evaporated. 
 
79 
T 
They both evaporated...  
 
80 
Do we see this happening? 
 
81 
S 
Yes 
 
82 
T 
If I put a glass of water… do you “”SEE”” this happening? 
 
83 
S 
No 
 
84 
T 
We don’t actually see them, the particles are tiny, they are invisible… 
 
85 
Why did I bring the perfume, then? 
 
86 
S 
So we can feel it. 
 
87 
T 
When the perfume liquid evaporates, it means that the perfume particle, the particle that 
has the smell, it was here in the liquid… 
 
88 
…it becomes...(?) 
 
89 
S 
Vapour. 
 
90 
T 
And then… when it turns into vapour, what can it do? 
 
91 
S 
It makes us smell it. 
 
92 
T 
It can spread. 
 
93 
S 
And smell it. 
 
 
In this following extract (3), students had just read the brief text about particle theory, and 
they were answering handout questions collectively. During the interactions, the teacher generally 
accepted responses including things like ‘separate’, ‘get further away from each other’, and ‘move faster’. 
She also explicitly asked for two other ‘things’ (lines 50 and 53) whereby she readily obtained ‘energy’ and 
‘freely’. The teacher seemingly aimed to find in students’ voices some keywords from the text. With these 
expected answers at hand (or their synonyms), the teacher provided the entire explanation in the last line. 
Again, these questions were not coded as dialogic (lines 50, 53, and 55) because expected answers were 
in the handout; students were merely reproducing them aloud and, as line 56 shows, hesitantly. It might 
the said that students’ text comprehension was explored, but it is harder to say that explanations were 
explored. 
 
       Extract 3. Whole-class: Guiding explanations through responses narrowing 
Line 
Speaker 
Utterances 
 
47 
T 
Now come on… question number three. What happens to water particles when it 
transforms from liquid to vapour? 
 
48 
S 
They separate and move faster 
 
49 
S 
They get further away from each other 
 
50 
T 
And there's one more thing... Who remembers? 
 
51 
S 
They also have a lot of energy 
 
52 
53 
T 
So they get more energy, don't they? And they can move faster, right? And there is another 
thing... What happens to the particles? 
 
54 
S 
They can move. 
 
55 
T 
Yes, but how can they move? 
 
56 
S 
Freely(?) 
 
57 
T 
So ... very well. The particles, then, they gain energy, don't they? 
 
58 
When they turn to vapour, they gain energy. They detach from each other. It is what 
happened in the dramatization. They detach from each other and are free in the 
surroundings, they move more quickly. 
 
 
Neither of the examples show clear evidence of exploring or deepening students’ ideas. 
Instead, it might be said that the teachers had clear objectives and tried to achieve them together with 
students. I would say that they were successful in highlighting the comparative analogy between water 
and perfume evaporation and emphasising a microscopic explanation of the evaporation process. The 
student contributed with few words and, apparently, followed the teachers’ line of reasoning. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.5052
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This type of micro-analysis of content of the utterances in these extracts have allowed us to 
explore some factors in more depth, like the building of conceptual understanding and results of each 
discursive strategy employed by the teacher.  It was possible to highlight a particular classroom activity 
and discursive techniques that had an impact on shaping classroom talk. 
 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we have discussed two research paradigms and related them to two 
methodological approaches to analysing educational dialogue; systematic coding (positivism-quantitative) 
and sociocultural discourse analysis (interpretivism-qualitative). The first consisted of a coding scheme 
in which utterances were allocated to predefined categories that can be broadened or broken down 
further as desired. Hennessy et al. (2020) list some advantages of frequency counting, such as processing 
large quantities of data, highlighting key markers, searching the dataset efficiently to find how specific 
acts correlate with others, detecting patterns, measuring change in practice and making comparisons 
subjected to statistical analysis. 
Such method allowed us to frame a general pattern of the small-group talk that emerged in 
a Brazilian primary school, as well as to search for differences across time. This last procedure was done 
by measuring the relative frequencies of the occurrence of codes. Thus, the findings represented here 
have illustrated the positive aspects highlighted above. The great loss in this analysis is the temporal 
development of meanings and the ambiguity because utterances can have more than one functions. In 
some cases, coding is said to be atheoretical or dogmatic in their conclusions (Hennessy et al., 2020). 
The second method explored in the paper is sociocultural discourse analysis. It gives 
prominence to the contextual and situatedness of turns of speech while deepening the meaning of 
contributions. Qualitative analysis can highlight the "participants' underlying intentions and responses to 
others moreover enables the researcher to go beyond the data, for instance to identify missed 
opportunities for extension or challenge." (Hennessy et al., 2020, p. 6). Categorising extracts as a whole 
can build models rather than recording the presence/absence of target discourse moves in a way in which 
categories/typologies are generated as outcomes rather than predetermined (Mercer, 2010).  
Employing this method, it was shown how teachers and students work together to build 
scientific explanation through classroom talk. From the five typologies identified in the original work, 
only one was presented here. It was seen how teachers can guide students’ ideas through a line of 
reasoning while building explanation interactively. Strategies like confrontation, response narrowing, and 
questioning were employed. 
Although quantitative and qualitative methods have been contrasted, both methodologies 
play play relevant roles and can be seen as complementary (Snell & Lefstein, 2011). Systematic coding is 
a method for managing an extensive data set, identification of general patterns across multiple lessons 
/tasks while allowing statistical comparisons and developmental analysis (Mercer et al., 2004). On the 
other hand, sociocultural discourse analysis can explore fine-grained and offer a multi-dimensional 
understanding of the complexities of classroom dialogue (Asterhan et al., 2020). While the former 
constricts the discursive interactions into measured variables (positivist ideal), the latter reveals the 
complexity and richness of the discursive exchanges with greater interpretative vein.  
From a theoretical point of view, Filho (2013) brings an instigating theoretical discussion on 
the incommensurability, complementary, and unity of the paradigms. Researchers from the first thesis 
argue that the realism and interpretivism views are in strict opposition and therefore are incompatible.  
The ones who advocate in favour of complementarity say that both paradigms are legitimate as they are 
not in necessarily conflict. Moreover, in the empirical domain, each paradigm aligns to goals that could 
not be tackled with another. Finally, the unity between these paradigms is considered mainly by pos-
positivist and critical philosophers who defend that there is no logical and consistent way to divide 
knowledge into radical terms. 
Here, I argue for a complementarity stance mainly in the analytical-empirical dimension as 
due to the nature of the research questions, both quanti- and qualitative methods can be required for the 
educational studies (Souza & Kerbauy, 2017). That is, taking a mixed-method approach to methodology 
(Tashakkori & Teddlie, 1998), it is possible to juxtapose different languages in order to answer 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.5052
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
research questions properly and coherently. As a result, while exploratory research questions privilege a 
qualitative analysis, others present a confirmatory bias should employ quantitative characterizations and 
comparisons. 
 
 
 
REFERÊNCIAS 
Author (XXXX) 
 
Alexander, R. (2001). Culture and pedagogy: International comparisons in primary education. Blackwell. 
 
Alexander, R. (2008). Towards dialogic teaching: Rethinking classroom talk (4th ed.). Dialogos. 
 
Asterhan, C. S. C., Howe, C., Lefstein, A., Matusov, E., & Reznitskaya, A. (2020). Controversies and 
consensus in research on dialogic teaching and learning. Dialogic Pedagogy: An International Online 
Journal, 8. https://doi.org/10.5195/dpj.2020.312 
 
Barnes, D. (1976). From communication to curriculum. Penguin Books. 
 
Braaten, M., & Windschitl, M. (2011). Working toward a stronger conceptualization of scientific 
explanation for science education: Scientific Explanations. Science Education, 95(4), 639–669. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/sce.20449 
 
Cazden, C. (1988). Classroom discourse: The language of teaching and learning. Heinemann. 
 
Cohen, L., Manion, L., & Morrison, K. (2007). Research Methods in Education. Routledge Ltd. 
 
Crotty, M. (1998). The foundations of social research: Meaning and perspective in the research process. SAGE 
Publications. 
 
Elo, S., & Kyngäs, H. (2008). The qualitative content analysis process. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 62(1), 
107–115. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2648.2007.04569.x 
 
Evans, M. (2013). Analysing qualitative data. In E. Wilson (Ed.), School-based research: A guide for education 
students (2nd ed., pp. 157–170). SAGE Publications. 
 
Filho, J. C. dos S. (2013). Pesquisa quantitativa versus pesquisa qualitativa: O desafio paradigmático. In 
J. C. dos S. Filho & S. Gamboa (Eds.), Pesquisa educacional: Quantidade-qualidade (8a ed, pp. 6–83). 
Cortez. 
 
Flanders, N. A. (1970). Analyzing teaching behavior. Addison-Wesley. 
 
Galton, M., Simon, B., & Croll, P. (1980). Inside the primary classroom. Routledge and Kegan Paul. 
https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203480892 
 
Gee, J. P., & Green, J. L. (1998). Discourse Analysis, Learning, and Social Practice: A Methodological 
Study. Review of Research in Education, 23, 119–169. https://doi.org/10.2307/1167289 
 
Gregory, C. G. (2020). Theoretical Promises and Methodological Troubles Capturing Dialogical 
Discourse in Classroom Research. Dialogic Pedagogy: An International Online Journal, 8. 
https://doi.org/10.5195/dpj.2020.313 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.5052
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guba, E. G., & Lincoln, Y. S. (1994). Competing paradigms in qualitative research. In N. K. Denzin & 
Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.), Handbook of qualitative research (pp. 105–117). SAGE Publications. 
 
Hennessy, S., Howe, C., Mercer, N., & Vrikki, M. (2020). Coding classroom dialogue: Methodological 
considerations for researchers. Learning, Culture and Social Interaction, 25, 100404. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lcsi.2020.100404 
Howe, C., Hennessy, S., Mercer, N., Vrikki, M., & Wheatley, L. (2019). Teacher–Student Dialogue During 
Classroom Teaching: Does It Really Impact on Student Outcomes? Journal of the Learning Sciences, 
1–51. https://doi.org/10.1080/10508406.2019.1573730 
 
Howe, C., & Mercer, N. (2007). Children’s social development, peer interaction and classroom learning. Primary 
Review, University of Cambridge Faculty of Education. https://cprtrust.org.uk/wp-
content/uploads/2014/06/research-survey-2-1b.pdf 
 
Kelly, G. J. (2014). Discourse Practices in Science Learning and Teaching. In N. G. Lederman & S. K. 
Abell (Eds.), Handbook of Research on Science Education, Volume II (pp. 321–336). Routledge. 
 
Kershner, R., Dowdall, K., Hennessy, S., Owen, H., & Calcagni, E. (2020). Teachers as ‘natural 
experimenters’: Using T-SEDA to develop classroom dialogue. In E. Hargreaves & L. Rolls 
(Eds.), Reimagining Professional Development in Schools (1st ed., pp. 102–122). Routledge. 
https://doi.org/10.4324/9780429293337-8 
 
Kershner, R., Hennessy, S., Wegerif, R., & Ahmed, A. (Eds.). (2020). Research Methods for Educational 
Dialogue. Bloomsbury Publishing. 
 
Kim, M.-Y., & Wilkinson, I. (2019). What is dialogic teaching? Constructing, deconstructing, and 
reconstructing a pedagogy of classroom talk. Learning, Culture and Social Interaction, 21, 70–86. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lcsi.2019.02.003 
 
Kumpulainen, K., Hmelo-Silver, C., & César, M. (Eds.). (2009). Investigating classroom interaction: 
Methodologies in action. Sense Publishers. 
 
Lemke, J. L. (2001). Articulating communities: Sociocultural perspectives on science education. Journal of 
Research 
in 
Science 
Teaching, 
38(3), 
296–316. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/1098-
2736(200103)38:3%3C296::aid-tea1007%3E3.0.co;2-r 
 
Märtsin, M. (Ed.). (2012). Dialogicality in focus: Challenges to theory, method and application. Nova Science 
Publishers. 
 
Mehan, H. (1979). Learning lessons: Social organization in the classroom. Harvard University Press. 
 
Mercer, N. (1995). The guided construction of knowledge: Talk amongst teachers and learners. Multilingual Matters. 
 
Mercer, N. (2002). Developing Dialogues. In G. Wells & G. Claxton (Eds.), Learning for Life in the 21st 
Century: Sociocultural Perspectives on the Future of Education (pp. 141–153). Blackwell Publishers. 
 
Mercer, N. (2003). Helping children to talk and think together more effectively. Polifonia, 7(07). 
 
Mercer, N. (2004). Sociocultural discourse analysis: Analysing classroom talk as a social mode of thinking. 
Journal of Applied Linguistics, 1(2), 137–168. https://doi.org/10.1558/japl.v1i2.137 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.5052
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mercer, N., & Dawes, L. (2014). The study of talk between teachers and students, from the 1970s until 
the 
2010s. 
Oxford 
Review 
of 
Education, 
40(4), 
430–445. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/03054985.2014.934087 
 
Mercer, N., Littleton, K., & Wegerif, R. (2004). Methods for studying the processes of interaction and 
collaborative activity in computer-based educational activities. Technology, Pedagogy and Education, 
13(2), 195–212. https://doi.org/10.1080/14759390400200180 
 
Mercer, N., Wegerif, R., & Major, L. (Eds.). (2020). The Routledge International Handbook of Research on 
Dialogic Education (1st ed.). Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780429441677 
 
Mercer, Neil. (2010). The analysis of classroom talk: Methods and methodologies. British Journal of 
Educational Psychology, 80(1), 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1348/000709909X479853 
 
Nassaji, H., & Wells, G. (2000). What’s the use of “triadic dialogue”?: An investigation of teacher-student 
interaction. Applied Linguistics, 21(3), 376–406. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/21.3.376 
 
Nystrand, M. (1997). Opening dialogue: Understanding the dynamics of language and learning in the English classroom. 
Teachers College Press. 
 
Resnick, L., Asterhan, C., & Clarke, S. (Eds.). (2015). Socializing Intelligence through academic talk and dialogue. 
American Educational Research Association. 
 
Robson, C. (2002). Real world research: A resource for social scientists and practitioner-researchers (2nd ed.). 
Blackwell. 
 
Roth, W.-M. (1996). Teacher questioning in an open-inquiry learning environment: Interactions of 
context, content, and student responses. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 33(7), 709–736. 
 
RStudio team. (2020). RStudio: Integrated Development for R. PBC. http://www.rstudio.com 
 
Schwarz, B., & Baker, M. (2016). Dialogue, Argumentation and Education: History, Theory and Practice. 
Cambridge University Press. 
 
Sinclair, J., & Coulthard, R. M. (1975). Towards an analysis of discourse: The English used by teachers and pupils. 
Oxford University Press. 
 
Snell, J., & Lefstein, A. (2011). Computer-assisted systematic observation of classroom discourse & 
interaction. Working Papers in Urban Language and Literacies. King’s College London., 77. 
https://www.academia.edu/attachments/33178716/download_file?s=portfolio. 
https://www.academia.edu/attachments/33178716/download_file?s=portfolio 
 
Souza, K., & Kerbauy, M. T. (2017). Abordagem quanti-qualitativa: Superação da dicotoamia 
quantitativa-qualitativa na pesquisa em educação. EDUCAÇÃO E FILOSOFIA, 31(61), 21–44. 
https://doi.org/10.14393/REVEDFIL.issn.0102-6801.v31n61a2017-p21a44 
 
SPRinG. (n.d.). SPRinG Project: Improving the effectiveness of pupil group-work in classrooms. Social Pedagogic 
Research into Group-work. http://www.spring-project.org.uk/ 
 
Taber, K. (2012). Prioritising paradigms, mixing methods, and characterising the ‘qualitative’ in 
educational 
research. 
Teacher 
Development, 
16(1), 
125–138. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/13664530.2012.674294 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.5052
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Taber, K. (2013). Classroom-based research and evidence-based practice: An introduction (2nd ed.). Sage 
Publications. 
 
Tashakkori, A., & Teddlie, C. (1998). Mixed methodology: Combining qualitative and quantitative approaches (pp. 
xi, 185). Sage Publications. 
 
 
Treagust, D. F., Won, M., & Duit, R. (2014). Paradigms in Science Education Research. In N. G. 
Lederman & S. K. Abell (Eds.), Handbook of Research on Science Education, Volume II (pp. 3–17). 
Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203097267.ch1 
 
Wells, G. (1993). Reevaluating the IRF sequence: A proposal for the articulation of theories of activity 
and discourse for the analysis of teaching and learning in the classroom. Linguistics and Education, 
5(1), 1–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0898-5898(05)80001-4 
 
Wilkinson, I., & Son, E. (2011). A Dialogic Turn in Research on Learning and Teaching to Comprehend. 
In Handbook of Reading Research (Vol. 4, pp. 359–387). Routledge. 
 
DECLARATION OF CONFLICT OF INTEREST 
 
The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest with this article. 
 
 
 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.5052
This preprint was submitted under the following conditions: 
The authors declare that they are aware that they are solely responsible for the content of the preprint and
that the deposit in SciELO Preprints does not mean any commitment on the part of SciELO, except its
preservation and dissemination.
The authors declare that the necessary Terms of Free and Informed Consent of participants or patients in
the research were obtained and are described in the manuscript, when applicable.
The authors declare that the preparation of the manuscript followed the ethical norms of scientific
communication.
The authors declare that the data, applications, and other content underlying the manuscript are
referenced.
The deposited manuscript is in PDF format.
The authors declare that the research that originated the manuscript followed good ethical practices and
that the necessary approvals from research ethics committees, when applicable, are described in the
manuscript.
The authors declare that once a manuscript is posted on the SciELO Preprints server, it can only be taken
down on request to the SciELO Preprints server Editorial Secretariat, who will post a retraction notice in its
place.
The authors agree that the approved manuscript will be made available under a Creative Commons CC-BY
license.
The submitting author declares that the contributions of all authors and conflict of interest statement are
included explicitly and in specific sections of the manuscript.
The authors declare that the manuscript was not deposited and/or previously made available on another
preprint server or published by a journal.
If the manuscript is being reviewed or being prepared for publishing but not yet published by a journal, the
authors declare that they have received authorization from the journal to make this deposit.
The submitting author declares that all authors of the manuscript agree with the submission to SciELO
Preprints.
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
