Objective: To analyze sociodemographic and lifestyle factors associated with screen-
based sedentary behavior (watching television ≥3 hours/day) among adult individuals in 
Brazil. 

Methods: Quantitative analysis of ten editions of the cross-sectional health 
survey VIGITEL, representative at population level. Individuals from states’ capitals 
living in households with land-line telephone were randomly selected and interviewed 
using structured questionnaire by telephone. A multivariate logistic regression model 
was estimated for identification of factors associated with screen-based sedentary 
behavior. 

Results: There was stability in trends referring to prevalence of sedentary 
behavior from 2008 to 2017. Prevalence of sedentary behavior was higher between 
individuals with unhealthier lifestyles: consumption of <2 in natura food items 
(vegetables, fruits and beans) per day (26.73% [95%CI 25.2%;28.31%]) in comparison 
to ≥2 items per day (23.79% [95%CI 21.92%;25.77%]); consumption of soft drinks ≥5 
days per week (31.24% [95%CI 29.58%;32.95%]) than <5 days per week (23.82% 
[95%CI 22.2%;25.52%]); and practice of <150 minutes of physical activity per week 
(28.2% 
[95%CI 
26.17%;30.33%]) 
than 
≥150 
minutes 
per 
week 
(22.54% 
[21.27%;23.86%]). Regular consumption of in natura food items (OR=0.984), practice 
of physical activity (OR=0.798) and living in richer municipality (OR=0.826) 
represented protective factors in relation to screen-based sedentary behavior, whilst 
regular consumption of soft drinks (OR=1.440), smoking (OR=1.375) and alcohol abuse 
(OR=1.334) represented risk factors. 

Conclusion: The adoption of screen-based 
sedentary behavior among adult individuals in Brazil presented significant association 
with modifiable behavioral factors in the period 2008-2017. 

Sedentary behaviors represent important risk factors for negative health outcomes; 
however, it differs substantially from absence of engagement in physical activity1,2. 
Evidence on associations between sedentary behavior and chronic non-communicable 
diseases indicates significant association with cardiometabolic3 and cardiovascular4 
diseases, cancer5, overweight and obesity6, and overall mortality7. 

The recently published guidelines of the World Health Organization on physical activity 
and sedentary behavior recommend that adult individuals (18-64 years-old) limit 
sedentarism, especially by replacing sedentary activities with physical activity at least 
150 to 300 minutes per week due to substantial benefits to individuals’ health, which 
contributes to well-being and overall quality of life8,9. 

Despite the harmful effects of sedentarism on health status, it presents high prevalence 
in diverse countries worldwide8. A recent study indicated that approximately 65% of 
adults in the United States devoted two or more hours per day watching television in 
2015-201610. 

It is important to emphasize that sedentary behavior and physical activity may be 
performed in different domains, e.g., during leisure, transportation or labor, and other 
occupational or educational activities. In general, sedentary behaviors that occur during 
leisure are considered discretionary, and time spent watching television is usually 
adopted as proxy variable for optional sedentary behavior in epidemiological studies, 
especially considering its sensitivity to influences from cultural and socioeconomic 
contexts11-13. 

Although there is emerging academic interest in factors associated with sedentary 
behaviors, most studies focus on high-income countries12,13, and there is lack of 
population level evidence for low- and middle-income countries, e.g. Brazil, especially 
considering the simultaneity of health behaviors and health conditions during broad 
periods. 

Therefore, the objective of the study was to analyze trends and protective and risk 
factors associated with adoption of screen-based sedentary behavior (watching 
television ≥3 hours/day) in adult population (≥18 years-old) living in Brazilian state 
capitals from 2008 to 2017. 

The study presents analysis of datasets from the Surveillance of Risk and Protection 
Factors for Prevention of Chronic Diseases through Telephone Survey (VIGITEL), 
conducted by the Brazilian Ministry of Health, including ten years of cross-sectional 
observational individual-level data from representative sample of the adult population 
living in Brazilian state capitals and Federal District in the period from 2008 to 2017. 

The VIGITEL is a telephone health survey conducted annually since 2006 by the 
Brazilian Ministry of Health to monitor risk and protection factors for chronic diseases 
in the Brazilian population. The databases include individual-level information for each 
year of the survey, available at the Brazilian Ministry of Health website. Microdata 
from surveys conducted from 2008 onwards were selected, considering the 
consolidation process of the survey during the first two years after implementation. 
VIGITEL sampling process is based on minimum sample of 1,500 individuals from 
each of the Brazilian state capitals and Federal District for estimation of frequency of 
risk and protection factors for chronic diseases in the adult population with 95% 
confidence and maximum error of three percentage points14. 

The first stage of sampling refers to random selection of at least 5,000 landlines per 
municipality from landline registrations of main telephone companies in the country. 
After initial drawing, lines eligible for survey are selected, i.e., active residential lines. 
The second stage of sampling consists of drawing one adult per household to participate 
in the survey14. Considering the survey sample design, individuals interviewed are 
assigned weights to allow statistical inferences in relation to the population of 26 state 
capitals and Brazilian Federal District, using rake method14. Data collection was carried 
out through structured interview with application of closed questionnaire by 
telephone14. 

In addition to information from VIGITEL, data referring to Gross Domestic Product 
(GDP) and population of each municipality, obtained from the Brazilian Institute for 
Geography and Statistics (IBGE), were included in the dataset to represent certain 
environmental aspects of the municipality and population economic status and to assess 
potential effects of economic conjuncture on other variables in the survey period (2008 
to 2017). 

Sedentary behavior (outcome) was based on self-reported daily time watching 
television, considering sedentary individuals with screen time equal or higher than 3 
hours per day. 

Variables of interest in the present study were: (1) self-reported frequency of 
consumption of in natura food items (vegetables, fruits and beans) per week15; (2) self-
reported frequency of consumption of soft drinks per week15; (3) sociodemographic 
characteristics: age, biological sex, educational attainment, ethnicity/skin color, marital 
status and occupation; (4) health characteristics: self-assessment of health status, self-
reported diagnosis of diabetes, self-reported diagnosis of hypertension, overweight and 
obesity; (5) self-reported behavioral characteristics: physical activity, alcohol abuse, and 
smoking; (6) GDP per capita in the municipality of residence of the individuals, using 
data obtained from IBGE. 

Information of VIGITEL databases ranging from 2008 to 2017 were further organized 
into a single dataset, after selection of variables compatible along the period of analysis, 
to allow statistical analysis on trends and factors associated with adoption of screen-
based sedentary behavior among adult individuals. 

A set of variables from VIGITEL was converted into binary variables, coded into 0 (no) 
and 1 (yes) values, according to specific criteria based on evidence of the literature or 
cutoff points established by national and/or international organizations: screen-based 
sedentary behavior, and regular consumption of in natura food items and soft drinks. 
The adoption of screen-based sedentary behavior was based on self-report of daily 
duration of television watching, considering the cutoff point of three or more hours per 
day. 

Regular consumption of in natura food items and soft drinks was based on self-reported 
frequency per item: none day, 1 to 2 days, 3 to 4 days, 5 to 6 days or all days of the 
week14. Three variables registering self-reported frequency of in natura food items 
consumption, i.e., beans, fruits and vegetables (considered markers of healthier food 
consumption patterns), were converted into number of days per week consuming each 
item, which were added up and divided by seven days per week to comprise total in 
natura food items consumed per day. Then, it was categorized using cutoff point of at 
least two items per day during the week14. 

Regular consumption of soft drinks (considered marker of unhealthier food 
consumption patterns) was categorized using cutoff point of consuming five or more 
days during the week15. 

Regarding sociodemographic characteristics, age and educational attainment were 
continuous variables maintained in its original format for the analysis. Biological sex, 
ethnicity/skin color, marital status and occupation were converted into categorical 
variables, encompassing the following categories, respectively: female (0) and male (1); 
white (0) and black, brown and indigenous (1); living with companionship, i.e., married 
and stable union (0) and living without companionship, i.e., single, divorced and 
widowed (1); and currently working (1) and not working (0). 

Amongst health characteristics, self-assessment of health status in five categories (very 
good, good, fair, poor or very poor) was converted into binary variable considering 
individuals who declared having poor or very poor health status. Presence of diabetes or 
hypertension were registered according to self-report of the individual. Occurrence of 
overweight (BMI ≥ 25 kg/m²)14 and obesity (BMI ≥ 30 kg/m²)14 in the VIGITEL was 
based on the estimation of the Body Mass Index (BMI), based on self-reported 
information about weight and height14. 

Behavioral characteristics were adopted in its original format from VIGITEL: physical 
activity level (≥ 150 minutes per week), alcohol abuse (≥ 5 doses for men; ≥ 4 doses for 
women at least on one occasion in the last 30 days), and smoking (current use of 
tobacco products, regardless the amount)14. 

Values of GDP per capita were updated by applying the National Consumer Price Index 
(IPCA-IBGE), using the accumulated price index of the period of each annual survey to 
the reference period of January 2019. 

Multivariate logistic regression model was estimated to evaluate association of screen-
based sedentary behavior with variables of interest selected, resulting in identification of 
sociodemographic and lifestyle protection and risk factors for adoption of screen-based 
sedentary behavior (outcome). The model included control variables for municipality, 
year of survey, and cross-effects of municipality and year of survey, in order to capture 
potential influence of local policies. Analyses were performed using statistical software 
Stata® (Stata Corp., College Station, USA), version 14.2 for Windows, applying svyset 
command for sample design using rake weighting method, considering statistical 
significance p0.05. 

The VIGITEL survey project was approved by the National Commission on Research 
Ethics (CAAE: 65610017.1.0000.0008). Informed consent was obtained verbally at the 
time of telephone contact14. 

Participants in VIGITEL survey were usually female individuals, individuals who 
declared themselves black, brown or indigenous, and individuals who worked. The 
proportion of young adults (18 to 39 years-old) was higher during the first survey 
editions; nevertheless, there was an increasing trend in participation of older adults (40 
to 59 years-old), and elderly individuals (over 60 years-old) (table 1 and table S1). 

The occurrence of individuals who self-reported certain health conditions increased 
throughout the period: diabetes (from 6.22% [95%CI 5.44% to 7.09%] in 2008 to 7.63% 
[95%CI 7.10% to 8.19%] in 2017; p<0.001), obesity (from 13.66% [95%CI 13.18% to 
14.15%] in 2008 to 18.92% [95%CI 18.08% to 19.79%] in 2017; p<0.001) and 
overweight (from 44.88% [95%CI 43.64% to 46.14%] in 2008 to 54.00% [95%CI 
52.58% to 55.41%] in 2017; p<0.001) in the period (table 1 and table S1). 

Adoption of screen-based sedentary behavior showed stability, presenting minor 
variations during the period (ranging from 22.53% [95%CI 21.11% to 24.02%] in 2015 
to 28.58% [95%CI 26.73% to 30.51%] in 2013); however, the differences registered 
throughout the period were statistically significant (p<0.001) (table 1 and table S1). 

Among other behavioral characteristics, physical activity ≥150 minutes/week showed 
increasing tendency during the period (from 43.07% [95%CI 40.77% to 45.40%] in 
2008 to 53.41% [95%CI 49.57% to 57.21%] in 2017; p<0.001), as well as abusive 
alcohol consumption (from 17.22% [95%CI 14.75% to 20.01%] in 2008 to 19.06% 
[95%CI 17.7% to 20.49%] in 2017; p=0.003). On the other hand, there was decreasing 
trend in frequency of consumption of soft drinks (from 26.41% [95%CI 23.10% to 
30.01%] in 2008 to 14.62% [95%CI 11.71% to 18.10%] in 2017; p<0.001), and 
smoking (from 14.77% [12.73% to 17.07%] in 2008 to 10.11% [7.94% to 12.79%] in 
2017; p<0.001) (table 1 and table S1). 

There were no statistically significant differences among individuals interviewed 
throughout the period regarding biological sex, occupation, self-assessment of poor 
health status and self-reported hypertension diagnosis (table 1 and table S1). 

Results of the logistic model on adoption of screen-based sedentary habit suggest 
statistically significant association with age, biological sex, ethnicity/skin color, marital 
status, educational attainment and occupation: older individuals (OR=0.999) and 
individuals with higher educational attainment (OR=0.991) had lower probability to 
adopt screen-based sedentary behavior; whilst women (OR=1.086), individuals who 
declared themselves to be black, brown or indigenous (OR=1.063), individuals living 
without companionship (OR=1.148), and individuals who were not working 
(OR=1.889) had higher probability (table 2). 

There were also statistically relevant associations with overweight (OR=1.111), obesity 
(OR=1.103), self-reported diagnosis of diabetes (OR=1.117), and hypertension 
(OR=1.097). In relation to behavioral characteristics, results indicated that regular 
consumption of in natura foods (OR=0.984) and practice of physical activity 
(OR=0.798) were protective factors against adoption of sedentary behavior; whilst 
consumption of soft drinks (OR=1.440), smoking (OR=1.375), and alcohol abuse 
(OR=1.334) were considered risk factors. Finally, considering economic context, there 
was lower adherence to sedentary habit among individuals living in municipalities with 
higher per capita GDP (OR=0.826) (table 2). 

Self-assessment of poor health status (OR=1.047) did not show statistical significance 
for screen-based sedentary behavior among adult individuals in the period analyzed. 

The adoption of screen-based sedentary behavior (watching television ≥3 hours/day) 
among adult individuals in Brazil presented significant association with health 
behaviors that may be modifiable through public policies strategies designed for 
primary health care interventions. 

Evidence of the study emphasizes the role of sociodemographic, economic and 
behavioral factors on lifestyle choices that influence health status of the Brazilian 
population. Mechanisms of reinforcement between screen-based sedentary behavior and 
other behavior patterns were observed in previous studies. Healthier lifestyle choices, 
including frequent consumption of in natura foods15 and regular physical activity8, were 
protective factors against sedentary behavior of watching television ≥3 hours per day. 
Conversely, unhealthy behavior patterns were usually risk factors for sedentary 
behavior, including frequent consumption of soft drinks15,16,17, smoking18 and alcohol 
abuse19. 

In Brazil, evidence referring to the protective role of regular in natura food 
consumption and recommended levels of physical activity in relation to adoption of 
sedentary behavior was also observed in previous study performed among public school 
teachers in Presidente Prudente municipality, state of Sao Paulo20; in addition, there 
were also associations between overfeeding and alcohol consumption with time spent 
watching television20. 

Results obtained in the study, reinforced by evidence in previous studies, draw attention 
to the concomitance and the repercussion of harmful habits to individual’s health, 
indicating the importance of the discussion on the presence of multiple behavioral risk 
factors in relation its impacts on health outcomes. Adherence to healthy lifestyles, i.e., 
combination of healthier behaviors, was significantly associated with reduction in 
premature death in the United States, resulting in increase in life expectancy, 
particularly healthy life years free from chronic non-communicable diseases (NCD)21,22. 
Similar evidence has been observed in studies with Brazilian adolescents23 and Polish 
adults24, particularly regarding eating patterns associated with screen-based sedentary 
behavior (including watching television). It points out to underlying mechanisms of 
encouragement for consumption of food items that are considered markers of 
unhealthier food consumption patterns (e.g., soda, snacks, and sweets) whilst watching 
television. Furthermore, the habit of watching television has been related to body fat 
deposits24, increasing risks of overweight, abdominal obesity, higher BMI and waist 
circumference6,25,26, which were partially observed in the results of the study also. 
It is important to emphasize that overweight and obesity are important risk factors for 
NCD27,28, being responsible for substantial health and economic burden in populations, 
health systems and households worldwide, considering direct costs with treatments and 
indirect costs for individuals, e.g., productivity losses, family commitment and 
emotional health impacts29-31. 

Our results have shown that, besides overweight and obesity, individuals who self-
reported diabetes and hypertension diagnosis were also more likely to adopt screen-
based sedentary behavior, association also observed in previous studies3,32. The 
evidence on the relationship between NCD and sedentary behavior fosters the 
discussion on the need for engagement of individuals diagnosed with NCD within 
initiatives for promotion of physical activity. It is especially important regarding 
perceived barriers to achieve recommended physical activity practice33,34, and adoption 
of healthier eating patterns35,36, which highlight the social and environmental influences 
on behavioral change. 

In the context of sociodemographic characteristics, results of the study showed higher 
tendency of screen-based sedentary behavior among individuals who declared being 
single, divorced, or widower; i.e., individuals living without companionship, in 
accordance with previous studies with Canadian and Japanese adults37,38. 

However, a systematic review has shown certain inconsistencies regarding the influence 
of family and household factors, including marital status, on adoption of sedentary 
behavior during leisure12. Therefore, although some evidence point to the adoption of 
screen-based sedentary behavior among individuals living unaccompanied, additional 
research is required to identify whether marital status influences sedentary habits like 
watching television, and its relationship with other sociodemographic factors over time. 
In any case, evidence call for attention towards the discussions about influences of peers 
in adoption of healthier lifestyles, encouraging and/or accompanying practice of 
physical activity during leisure, instead of sedentary recreational activities like watching 
television37,38. 

In terms of ethnicity/skin color, it is important to point out that higher trends in screen-
based sedentary behaviors among individuals declaring themselves black, brown or 
indigenous may be linked to environmental characteristics that impose barriers to 
physical activity practice in ethnic minorities, according to evidence from studies in 
United Kingdom39 and United States40. Thus, it represents an opportunity to discuss 
design of health policy interventions with an equitable orientation, focusing on specific 
characteristics of the Brazilian black, brown, or indigenous individuals. 

Sedentary behavior presents socioeconomic and cultural determinants related to the 
organization of contemporary society, labor and educational activities, i.e., routines that 
have been designed to occur generally in sitting position with minor energy expenditure, 
promoting sedentarism in individuals and populations11. Whilst adherence to physical 
activity is commonly associated with leisure in high-income countries and work in low-
income countries, it is possible to observe both situations in middle-income countries 
like Brazil41. 

Therefore, the adoption of indicators like watching television three or more hours per 
day for analysis of sedentary behavior may comprise an important marker of 
discretionary recreational activity, unlike other forms of screen-based sedentary 
behavior, e.g., duration of activities using computer, which may be linked to 
occupational activities. Our results showed that individuals who declared that were not 
working presented higher tendency to maintain screen-based sedentary behavior during 
leisure by watching television ≥3 hours per day. 

However, considering differences observed in time spent in sedentary behaviors in 
diverse life domains in Brazil, assessed in a study conducted in the city of Pelotas, state 
of Rio Grande de Sul42, it is important to further investigate sedentary behavior in 
different life domains in the Brazilian population. 

The main limitations of the study refer to methodological characteristics of VIGITEL 
databases, especially referring to data collection based on cross-sectional survey 
design14, which prevents establishment of causal relationships between screen-based 
sedentary behavior in relation to sociodemographic and behavioral characteristics of the 
Brazilian adult population. 

In addition, changes in the survey questionnaires throughout the period of analysis 
limited the possibility of including certain characteristics of interest in the study, like 
presence of hypercholesterolemia, consumption of other food items (milk, meat, and 
sweets), among others. Therefore, only variables that remained directly comparable 
during the period analyzed were selected in the study, allowing consistency for 
estimation of the model proposed. 

VIGITEL includes self-reported characteristics through telephone survey, which may 
result in underestimation of characteristics that individuals’ believe “wrong” or 
“socially unacceptable” and overestimation of characteristics perceived “right” or 
“socially acceptable”, thus reducing accuracy of analysis referring to certain 
individual’s characteristics and behaviors. Furthermore, the variable for screen-based 
sedentary habit covers time spent watching television, and it does not include time spent 
with use of other devices, like computers, tablets and mobile phones, which would 
potentially increase prevalence of sedentariness in the Brazilian adult population, 
especially considering the widespread of information and communication technologies 
throughout the period analyzed. 

Sample selection in VIGITEL is based on population representativeness of individuals 
living in Brazilian state capitals and Federal District that have landline telephone, i.e., 
areas of high urbanization43; thus, there is absence of representativeness of rural 
population in the study. Previous studies point to need to use alternative weighting 
strategies in the case of regions with low coverage of household landlines, pointing to 
potential underestimation biases due to tendency to substitute the use of landlines by 
mobile phones throughout time44,45. 

However, it is important to point that an assessment on the sampling and stratification 
processes adopted within VIGITEL indicated validity and representativeness for 
research and monitoring risk and protection factors related to the health status of the 
Brazilian population46. Furthermore, sample size of the survey and its sampling 
procedures minimize potential biases in responses that potentially under- or 
overestimate monitoring of trends and risk or protection factors associated with 
sedentary behavior in the Brazilian adult population. 

Finally, increasing trends towards sedentarism, alcohol abuse, overweight and obesity 
during period analyzed represent a call for action within the context of the Brazilian 
health system, especially directed to primary health care strategies for health promotion 
and disease prevention. Considering the lack of cohort data representative at national 
level in Brazil, results of the study may subsidize the formulation of strategic 
interventions in public health policies to promote healthy lifestyles among Brazilian 
adults. 
