Herein, we describe the detection of a SARS-CoV-2 genome through metatranscriptome next-
generation sequencing directly from the nasopharyngeal swab of a suspected case of local 
transmission of Covid-19, in Brazil. Depletion of human ribosomal RNA and use of an optimized 
in-house developed bioinformatics strategy contributed to successful detection of the virus. 

COVID-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, was firstly 
recognized as an atypical pneumonia in China, in December 2019. By early-April 2020, the 
disease had already spread globally to more than 150 countries, with over 1,000,000 confirmed 
cases according to the World Health Organization (WHO) (1). The first confirmed imported case 
in South America was in February 26, 2020, from a traveler returning from Northern Italy to the 
city of São Paulo, the largest city in Brazil (2). Soon after, first suspected cases of local 
transmission within the country were reported, including in the Bahia state, in early March 2020.   

Ascertaining the roles of different diagnostic technologies during an ongoing epidemic of 
viral infection is challenging, and recent studies have already reported sensitivity issues when 
using real-time reverse transcription PCR (RT-qPCR) for diagnosing COVID-19 (3,4). Possible 
interfering factors in RT-qPCR may arise from high viral recombination of coronaviruses (5) and 
varying viral loads in the natural course of disease (6), but this still needs further studies in the 
COVID-19 diagnostics context (7). Therefore, developing new protocols for untargeted clinical 
metagenomics may provide valuable diagnostic tools for detecting SARS-CoV-2 and other 
pathogens in a current global scenario of emerging viral infections. Other studies have recently 
reported on metagenome-based strategies for next-generation sequencing of SARS-CoV-2 and 
varying results were reached, when comparing amplicon-based sequencing or direct 
metatranscriptome sequencing. Also, metagenome sequencing from bronchoalveolar lavage 
specimens rendered better results when compared to nasal swabs (5,8). 

In this study, we successfully detected a SARS-CoV-2 genome directly from a 
nasopharyngeal swab specimen of a suspected case of local transmission of COVID-19 in Brazil, 
using a metatranscriptomics approach. On March 03, 2020, a female patient presented to a public 
hospital, in Feira de Santana-Bahia, Brazil, complaining of sore-throat and mild-dyspnea. Due to 
self-reported close contact with a returning traveler from Italy who had a confirmed COVID-19 
diagnosis, specific diagnostic investigation was warranted, and a nasopharyngeal swab sample 
was immediately collected. Viral RNA extraction and RT-qPCR amplification were  carried out 
following a protocol validated in our group at the Institute of Health Sciences, Federal University 
of Bahia, Salvador-BA, Brazil, according to a Promega application report (Promega Application 
Report, 
2020; 
https://www.promega.com.br/applications/virus-detection-assay-coronavirus-
detection-covid-19-sars-cov-2/). In brief, 200 µL of samples stored in transport medium 
(Leibovitz`s L15) were submitted in triplicate to RNA extraction in the Maxwell 16 instrument, 
following the Maxwell® 16 Viral Total Nucleic Acid System protocol (Promega). Detection of 
SARS-CoV-2 viral genome by RT-qPCR was done according to the CDC 2019-Novel Coronavirus 
protocol (9), using the GoTaq® Probe 1-Step RT-qPCR System (Promega) and primers/ probe 
targeting the nucleocapsid (N) encoding region. A moderately high viral load was detected in the 
nasopharyngeal swab sample, with a cycle threshold (Ct) of 21, which is similar to the highest 
values reported for the first days since symptoms onset in eighteen Chinese patients (6).    

In parallel, the extracted RNA (ca. 14 ng/µL) was submitted to metatranscriptome next-
generation sequencing in the Ion S5 platform (ThermoFisher) using an Ion 540™ chip and the 
Ion Total RNA-Seq kit v2, as per the manufacturer’s protocol (ThermoFisher). One sample was 
previously processed with the Low Input RiboMinus™ Eukaryote System v2 (ThermoFisher), for 
depletion of human ribosomal RNA from total RNA (Fig. 1). Sequence reads were pre-processed 
by quality filtering (Phred >20), presence of ambiguous bases (>1% sequence with Ns), and size 
(reads >= 30 nt); all reads deriving from human transcripts were also discarded: 77.29% in the 
rRNA depleted library and 84.49% in the whole RNA library. The remaining sequence reads (size 
range: 30 - 358 nt) were then used for contig assembly (see detailed pipeline in Fig. 1). 
Sequencing data is available at NCBI’s SRA database under accession number PRJNA613951. 

Overall, depletion of human rRNA rendered significantly higher numbers of contigs (n = 
51; N50 = 180 nt) confidentially aligned to the SARS-CoV-2 viral genome (Figure 1b), yielding a 
genome coverage of 29.9% for contigs and 59.9% for total reads, which is higher than the 
coverage reported for nasopharyngeal swabs in recent studies (8). SNP analysis using Atlas 2 
(https://sourceforge.net/p/atlas2/wiki/Atlas-SNP/) indicated that mutations accumulate mainly in 4 
ORFs (ORF1a, M, ORF8 and N) in addition to 3’UTR, in a similar profile observed for strains 
derived from Brazilian patients present in NexStrain platform (https://nextstrain.org/). 

Our results confirm that direct metatranscritptome sequencing from nasopharyngeal 
swabs can be used as an additional strategy in the detection of SARS-CoV-2 infection, besides 
providing information on possible nucleotide mutations that could interfere with sensitivity of 
diagnostics based on RT-qPCR (4). Noteworthy, handling of the sample and preparation of the 
sequencing library, particularly regarding depletion of ribosomal RNA, may significantly impact 
metatranscriptomic results. 
