This article sought to identify articles published on the action of the dentist in the 
application of the Oral Rapid HIV Test (ORHT). The search was undertaken from 
October 2018 to August 2019, and investigated the databases PubMed, Cochrane, 
Lilacs e Scopus, from articles published in the English language during the period from 
2015 to 2019. Altogether 89 bibliographical references were found, after repetitions and 
articles that did not deal with the subject were eliminated, a total of 11 remained for 
analysis. Five articles reported the direct clinical action of the dentist and the remainder 
dealt with research on the oral rapid test. The studies showed how the dentist may 
contribute meaningfully to public health by the identification of persons infected with 
HIV.  

The magnitude of HIV and AIDS infection in the world has shown that in the 
last 40 years the consequences are harmful and continue to constitute a concern for 
public health1.  

Seven thousand people are infected by HIV every day in the world. 
Subsaharan Africa accounts for 60% of the individuals who live with HIV, 58% of whom 
are women. The Caribbean, eastern Europe and central Asia have a prevalence ratio 
of 1% of the population and have areas profoundly affected by the epidemic1.  

According to the Joint Program of the United Nations on HIV/AIDS2 the 
number of people living with HIV/AIDS in Latin America attained 1.9 million in 2018. 
There was an increase of 7% in the number of new cases between 2010 and 2018, 
showing that Latin America was one of the worst regions in the fight against HIV with 
an estimate of 100,000 persons who had acquired HIV3. The country with the greatest 
increase was Chile (34% in the period), followed by Bolivia (22%), Brazil and Costa 
Rica (both with 21%)3. In Brazil, from 2007 to June 2018, Sinan had notified 247,795 
cases of infection by HIV4. 

It is a challenge to identify early, the persons who are infected but who have 
still not presented clinical evidence of AIDS. By 2030, it is expected that the number of 
deaths related to the disease will have diminished by 80%, but with an increase in the 
cases of the infection diagnosed and undergoing timely treatment5. 

As an option for the early diagnosis and preventive treatment of the HIV virus, 
the Oral Fluid Test or the Oral Rapid HIV Test (ORHT) was developed in 20046. 
Initially, it sought to reach all the persons who faced difficulties of access to 
laboratories and exams and who had faced situations of prejudice and who wished to 
preserve their intimacy and identity, as this was an alternative to the conventional test 
made by the collection of blood in the laboratory and to the rapid test with the use of 
needles in the fingers, rapidly and economically. With the passage of time, it has been 
offered more generally by health services and even in commercial establishments. 

In 2005, Regulation nº 34/05 was implanted in Brazil with a view to regulating 
the use of rapid anti-HIV tests in specific situations7. This legislation sought to amplify 
access to the diagnosis of HIV infection, giving as a justification the fact that knowledge 
of the serological status and early diagnosis contributed to the interruption of the chain 
of transmission. The beginning of the expanded implantation throughout the national 
territory, by means of the ORHT became possible as from the implantation of 
regulation nº 29 of December 17, 20138. The test consists of the withdrawal of the oral 
fluid by means of a collector from the region of the upper and lower buccal gingival 
sulcus, 4 times, with slight friction9. The exam guarantees a precision of 99% of 
positive results with an approximate immunological window of up to three months (the 
time between the possible infection and the exam’s giving a positive result) and which 
ought, if necessary, to be repeated after another three months of an exposure of risk to 
the contagion of HIV10. 

In Brazil, as from 2017, the ORHT were regulated by Anvisa and are used in 
the Unified Health System (SUS). It is possible to do the test for HIV at a Center for 
Testing and Advice (CTA), in Basic Health Units (UBS), in specialized services of 
attention to sexually transmissible diseases and hospitals. The rapid tests may be 
undertaken by means of a venous puncture or samples of oral fluid to verify the 
presence of the antibodies produced by the HIV infection. The self-tests have been 
commercialized by private drugstores and by the SUS network as from January 2019 
and can be carried out by the persons themselves, with the collection of blood, by 
means of a specific lancet to prick the finger which comes in the kit or the oral fluid test 
which is non-invasive and painless, is of easy use and is able to confirm the result 
enabling the contaminated person to start the treatment available on the public health 
network. Both present a result in about 20 minutes and in negative cases should be 
repeated after 30 days. In positive cases, the result should be confirmed at a health 
service12. 

The Department of Surveillance, Prevention and Control of Sexually 
Transmissible Diseases, of HIV/Aids and of the Viral Hepatitis, offers training at a 
distance on ORHT, by means of videos provided by the Ministry of Health10. The dental 
surgeon is one of the professionals who can undergo the training and carry out the 
ORHT, as they are an important agent of prevention.  

In the USA, dental assistants are trained to apply the ORHT and to identify the 
persons who do not know their serological situation, because they possess knowledge 
of HIV and abilities which fit into the practice of the reception of persons who seek the 
test13-14. 

A representative research project with dental-surgeons undertaken in the USA 
in 2010 and 2011 showed that the majority of them considered that the dentist’s office 
is a convenient place for undertaking the test, their offer constituting a strategy to 
confront the HIV epidemic, but they identified as barriers to the implementation of this 
action in dental surgeries, the cost, the stigma associated with the disease, the lack of 
experience of the professional in the activity and their not having the specific abilities to 
deal with positive ORHT, though they agreed that it was of great value to the 
population15. 

Dentists, in Australia, know that 14% of the persons who live with HIV, as also 
those in other countries, do not know of their serological condition and that the dental 
surgeons can help to reduce this percentage, by means chiefly of the application of the 
ORHT, for the population who do not have access to the means for monitoring the 
infection16.  

In a first search of the literature on the activity of dental surgeons and the 
ORHT, no national studies were found. In view of this, the objective of the present 
study is to identify what the situation of dental surgeons with regard to ORHT is, as 
described in the scientific literature. 

One is here dealing with an integrative review study on the question: “what is 
there in the literature on the activity of dental surgeons in the application of ORHT for 
HIV?”. An on-line search was carried out for scientific articles, in the English language, 
published during the period from 2015 to 2019.  

The following bases was accessed during the period from October 2018 to 
August 2019: a) PubMed/MEDLINE: a source of multidisciplinary information on 
biomedical literature with the indexation of articles of journals at the world level17; b) 
LILACS (Literatura Latino-Americana e do Caribe em Ciências da Saúde: Literature of 
Latin America and the Caribbean on Health Sciences): is the data-base of technical-
scientific literature of the health field, which also functions as a store of the scientific 
production of the whole of Latin America and the Caribbean18; c) Scopus: is a data-
base of the data of peer reviews and possesses tools which accompany, analyze and 
visualize bibliographical research, containing abstracts and interoperability with various 
other bases with complete texts19 and; d) Cochrane Library: a collection of the 
databanks which contain various types of independent evidence, of high quality, to 
report on the taking of decisions in the health field20. 

The search was undertaken in two stages. Stage 1, in which Health 
Terminology was used, after consulting the Descriptors in Health Sciences (DeCS), 
and the following descriptors were used: Routine Diagnostic Tests, Diagnostic Reagent 
Kits and HIV. As no articles in accordance with these descriptors were found there 
followed a second stage using the key words “oral rapid test” and “HIV”. In stage 2, the 
search was detailed, automatically, by the source of information PubMed as is 
presented in Table 2, where the bases for the indexation and the strategies used may 
be found. 

They have been represented by means of a fluxogram (Figure 1), the number of 
articles found having been selected by the identification of the number of articles found, 
in the end 11 articles were selected, identified by the capital letters from A to K.  

A spread-sheet was prepared on Excel with the publications identified. As an 
exclusion criterion, first the repetitions were eliminated, then after the reading of the 
titles and abstracts those of the greatest interest were selected. Then the articles not 
related to the main theme and those which were outside the period selected were 
withdrawn. As inclusion criteria articles related to the principal theme which included 
dentists and dental clinics which applied the ORHT, were selected complete and in 
English. The spread sheet contained the following information: title of the article, 
database, country of the study, objective, study design, clinical activity of the dentist in 
the application of the ORHT, results and conclusion/final considerations. On the basis 
of the study design the methodology employed in each article was ascertained. 

The studies identified in the Review show that the ORHT is undertaken in the 
private offices and clinics and in public services, in various countries14, 16, 21-26.  

There is agreement among the users of the dental clinics in general, that there 
exist both ease of application and practicality for the application of the ORHT for the 
purpose of testing for HIV in these places. Because of the relation of proximity between 
the dental surgeon and their clients, associated with the privacy of the clinic, the 
subject of the application of the ORHT may be raised more easily there. A study of 
Alves Rezende et al.27, undertaken in 2015, showed that empathy is important for the 
promotion of health, contributing directly to the best results in terms of the treatment 
proposed. 

For the public of lesbians, gays, bisexuals, trans-sexuals and their sympathizers 
the dental clinic is an appropriate, private place for the test, because it guarantees the 
individuality of gender23, 28-29. Two of these studies, both conducted in American 
clinics14, 26, state that, on their part, the dental surgeons feel that they are prepared to 
collaborate in the application of the ORHT to those who do not know their serological 
situation and who might have HIV. They take into consideration the importance of the 
technique of buccal hygiene in helping with and carrying out the ORHT.  

Bradley et al.22, in a study financed by the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC) of the USA, understand that dental clinics can provide greater 
opportunities for oral rapid HIV tests and conversation about the prevention of HIV in 
communities with a high prevalence of HIV. The study covered 600 patients with a 
median age of 43 years and obtained acceptance for the application of the ORHT on 
the part of 85% of them, 14% never having previously undergone the test. Among 
those who refused to undergo the test, they said they felt at ease to discuss the 
prevention of HIV with their respective dentists. It is important that the study identified 
119 patients who practiced unprotected sex with a seropositive partner and/or with 
persons whose serology was unknown.  

The ORHT is being applied in dental schools and in dental clinics which permit 
the study and practical learning of this diagnostic technique. Secondly, according to 
studies undertaken in China and the USA, the dental school can inculcate new values 
for the dental sector which may contribute to this preventive action because it is the 
ideal place for the implementation of this technology in its future work, revealing 
barriers and prejudices and act, directly, to ease the educational process, fulfilling a 
fundamental role in the advance of public health24, 30. 

The study of Shifu et al.21 conducted in dental clinics in China showed that 
dentists diagnosed oral diseases on the basis of the initial symptoms of AIDS such as 
oral candidiasis, herpes zoster, herpes simplex, oral bacteria, or fungus infection and 
recurring mouth ulcers and proceeded with the treatment after the application of these 
tests.  

Since 2006, dental clinics have been included as appropriate places for the 
screening of ORHT in the USA. In Kansas City, Missouri, a study was undertaken in a 
dental clinic which attended a diverse population and the test was applied free of 
charge during the dental visit. The attitudes of the patients with regard to the test were 
positive - providing no additional charge was added to that of the treatment. The 
principal reasons for not wanting to do the test were related to the fact of their having 
taken the test in other places and to the low perception of risk. In general, the patients 
agreed that the dental office is a viable option for the ORHT and for becoming 
acquainted with their serological status31.  

In the study of Suarez-Durall et al.24, 60.2% of the persons researched were not 
disposed to do the rapid test on the date agreed, for undeclared reasons. Four 
undiagnosed possible infections were identified in the same study, according to a 
structured algorithm. The rate of incidence of seropositivity for HIV of 0.31% found in 
the initial screening, showed that the dental clinic is an important place for the 
discovery of persons with hitherto undiagnosed HIV. The study of Moreschi et al.32 
showed that there is some concern among dental surgeons as to the possibility of an 
accident with a perforating and cutting material and the possibility of infection.  

As one difficulty regarding the application of the TRO, there are dentists who 
express fear and prejudice in the light of the possibility of dental treatment together with 
the application of ORHT in their clinics, especially when a positive result for HIV 
appears16, 25, 29. Even though it has been more than 30 years since the outbreak of the 
HIV epidemic, the most common motives are lack of information, absence of the 
technical ability to deal with the infection, inappropriate structure of the health unit, 
uncertainty, and fear of contamination33. 

The discrimination and prejudice present among dentists also lead to difficulty in 
their adhesion to the treatment of oral health and interfere directly in the quality of life of 
their seropositive patients. Professionals who are prepared, by way of Permanent 
Education, and who have experience in the handling of dental treatment of HIV positive 
patients, are better able to deal with this population34. 

The article of Bradley et al.22 describing research undertaken in the south of 
Florida, raises questions related to the cost of the application of the ORHT, such as the 
fact of the test’s not being made available by the public sector. The dental clinic 
assumes this cost which will then have to be covered by the client, which creates a 
barrier to the ORHT being implanted in the clinics. In fact, according to Davide et al.26, 
more than half the patients (72.2%) agreed to do the HIV test at a dental hygiene clinic, 
in the city of New York (USA), though more than 30% said they agreed to do the HIV 
test in the dental setting, provided there was no additional cost.  

Dental professionals in partnership with those of public health can collaborate 
with the expansion of the application of the HIV tests, by means of training courses 
which perfect their knowledge and result in their acceptance of patients with HIV, which 
permit the use of the ORHT, including the possibility of repayment for the tests which 
would contribute to their application22. 

The same article discusses the point that beyond the financial gains, there will 
also be an increase in the professionals’ resulting work load22.  

Siegel et al.35 state that a cultural change, beginning in the dental schools, may 
prove to be necessary to involve dentists more actively in primary prevention and in the 
HIV selection process by means of the oral rapid tests. In this qualitative study, 174 
professionals participated but only 40 dentists replied to the questionnaires, thus 
showing that the majority were worried about the fact that the time taken in applying the 
HIV test would not be adequately covered by an equivalent financial compensation, 
and commented that applying the HIV test would increase the time spent by the patient 
in the dental chair and would thus affect the productivity of their dental work negatively. 
On the other hand, other colleagues saw the HIV test as a service that they wished to 
offer their patients, regardless of the level of compensation. Some participants in this 
study commented that dentists generally resist carrying out new tasks. 

Feinstein-Winitzer et al.36 discovered that the odontological setting is ideal for 
the application of preventive exams for HIV, even with all the difficulties to be faced by 
the professional personnel, for the repayment by insurance companies. Preventive 
exams such as those for oral cancer had their repayment guaranteed, which has not 
yet happened with the oral rapid test for HIV, applied during dental treatment. Among 
the difficulties for the receiving of repayment were emphasized: the minimal number of 
persons available to apply the test, the limited evidence of the test’s efficacy, the return 
on the investment for the dental setting, and the lack of training of the supplier of the 
test, which create a barrier to the application of the test in dental offices.  

Parish and Santella28, through a dental association, conducted a study selecting 
dentists to act as participants in the research and investigate the application of the oral 
rapid test to the attitudes and behavior of the LGBTS population, in the ORHT and 
relate it too to oral health. 

In Brazil, the application of the ORHT is not an established practice in private 
dental offices. However, counselling is undertaken as a practice in the public health 
services, in multidisciplinary teams, as for example when the dentist faces up to the 
problems involved in a possible positive result to the HIV test37.  

The most recent studies published in Brazil on the ORHT theme date from the 
decade of the 2000s, and there has been no later up-dating. The study of Telles-Dias 
et al.38 on a population of injectable drug users showed the viability of the use of rapid 
tests, preferably oral tests, as they are painless, trustworthy, and allow the user to 
ascertain their serological situation and begin adequate treatment if they are 
seropositive.  

In Brazil, dental surgeons, it was discovered that Aids continues to inspire fear 
and prejudice among them, thus hindering attendance to bearers of HIV. There is still a 
lack of knowledge regarding the development of the disease and the forms of treatment 
and prevention. They do not always use the equipment for personal protection, the 
principal means for protection to be used in their activities to avoid contamination, 
adequately. 

Strategies for the inclusion of dental surgeons in the prevention of HIV do exist, 
as reported in the city of Fortaleza, in a joint action bringing together the Oral Health of 
the Municipal Bureau of Health and the Coordination of Viral Hepatitis and DST/Aids. 
The action sought to broaden the knowledge of dental professionals and their 
attendance on persons who live with HIV/aids. This experiment, published as a study, 
showed that the professionals did not feel themselves apt to attend to this population, 
the main motives for the refusal being: lack of information and of technical training, a 
lack of structure at the health units, insecurity and fear of contamination33. According to 
the authors, the strategies which could modify that mentality are based on the 
improvement of the structures of the places where the services are offered, educational 
up-dating, concepts of bio-security and the humanization of the means of health as a 
means of facing the stigma of aids for the adequate treatment of oral health.  

Rocha et al.37 call attention to the fact that dentists are little involved in the 
ORHT for HIV, because they do not feel they are prepared to address the needs of the 
users and that is why the responsibility for applying it is delegated to the nursing team. 
The study shows that the rapid testing is not in the hands of the health team which calls 
attention to the lack of security related to risk management and of emotional support in 
dealing with seropositive results. 

In Brazil, article two of the Code of Dental Ethics recommends that the activity 
of the dentist should be exercised for the benefit of the health of the human being, of 
the collectivity and of the environment, with no discrimination of any sort or on any 
pretext39.  

Permanent education and humanization in odontology permit a better view in 
the clinical attendance dedicated to the persons who are carriers of HIV, thus 
guaranteeing the exercise of the profession without prejudice, stigma or stress33. 

It is to be hoped that the diagnosis of aids would not lead to excessive care or 
changes of behavior in the dentist-patient relationship seeing that the bio-security 
protocols train the professional to guarantee the physical integrity of both40. This study 
showed that the stigma of aids led 55% of the participants to deny they were 
seropositive as a way of guaranteeing that the integrity and effectiveness of the dental 
treatment would not be affected. Patients reported that after they had revealed their 
seropositive condition they perceived a change of posture in the attendance given, 
probably due to a lack of information on the part of the professional (20%) and the fear 
of contamination (7%) of HIV40. 

The dentists occupied an important position in the diagnosis of HIV, because 
they provide care for the oral health of many persons who do not frequent the health 
system’s facilities regularly and because of the ease and confidence in the oral rapid 
test. This can guarantee the spread and activity of the dental surgeon41. 

VanDevanter et al.42, in a qualitative study of the attitudes of patients to the HIV 
test in a dental office reported that the patients told of their ready acceptance of the 
test, because they showed themselves to be very willing to undergo the HIV screening 
in view of its ease of access, acceptance and approval of the application. It also offers 
great testing potential and reaches millions of people annually by means of rapid kits 
even though they do not come within the scope of normal dental practice. However, 
few dentists and few academic dental centers have incorporated HIV screening in 
practice. 

Technical and scientific advances have resulted in greater ease of application 
and trustworthiness in the recommendation of the rapid tests, especially those for HIV 
infection. Rapid tests use the response to HIV antigens resulting from oral secretions or 
total blood43. In May 2012, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) of the United 
States approved the first test kit in vitro for the diagnosis of HIV (HIV-1 and HIV-2), to 
be applied at home using oral fluid, OraQuick® In-Home44, manufactured by OraSure 
Technologies. This oral test uses a swab for samples of the gum fluid in a test making 
use of ELISA screening. There were false negative results in acute cases and also due 
to the non-participation of duly trained individuals. The reactive tests require 
confirmation of their results, as in all the exams. In the last 25 years, the tests for HIV 
have undergone an ample and meaningful expansion of recommendations in view of 
factors such as improvements in technology, the nature of the epidemic and the 
acceptance by infected persons41, 45-47. 

Hutchinson et al.43 have made it clear that the viability of the test in a dental 
setting - as a routine test, can guarantee a reduction in the rates of HIV infection. 
Limitations of a practical sort, such as repayment, can be administered in the light of 
the benefit to clients, and health professionals with a broad education in HIV will 
succeed in improving the health of the community. 

According to Pollack et al.15 the diagnosis of HIV is an imperative for public 
health. New recommendations give guidance on actions for HIV testing as part of a 
routine series of health care measures in all settings, including oral tests which can be 
applied at home. The health services offer greater advantages for the diagnosis of HIV 
as they provide the patient with a welcoming reception, education and general support. 
The health professionals of the dental community are in a key position for the diagnosis 
of HIV, due to their routine care for the individuals who, frequently, do not attend the 
health system’s facilities but have access to the dental services safely and regularly. 
Thus the oral rapid test for HIV is appropriate for the dentist’s office15.  

Even though there exist barriers to be faced – such as the lack of inclination on 
the part of dentists to offer the screening for the test and their perception of its 
acceptance by their patients, these attitudes should be evaluated before the application 
so that they do not become obstacles15. 

Pollack, Metsch and Abe48 reported that 70% of the individuals at risk of 
infection by HIV had visited a dentist within the previous two years. The routine tests 
present ample benefits both personal, professional and social and can result in 
substantial reductions in HIV infection. 

HIV screening for oral fluids was described as having benefits for patients, 
dentists and for the public good. Barriers to the implementation of the test can be dealt 
with by training and interdisciplinary collaboration43. 

The literature review evidenced the action of dental surgeons in relation to the 
ORHT, and the fact that in Brazil actions are being undertaken in the public health 
services in the multi-professional context which could be expanded, leading to the 
greater outreach of the activity, by the offer of the application of the ORHT in dental 
offices and clinics inclusive, with the greater involvement of the dentists.  

The dentist’s office provides a favorable and appropriate context for this as it is 
dedicated to the treatment of health. If the dental surgeon is duly trained, he can 
attribute a new significance to the paradigms of the behavior of HIV-positive and 
negative patients, contributing to the application of the ORHT, with a precise diagnosis 
which respects the patient´s individuality, with the necessary follow-up which will, in its 
turn, also reduce the comorbidity rates for aids. 

The dental surgeon can act directly on this interface of the implementation of 
the ORHT in dental offices and clinics, having the 90-90-90 target in view that, beyond 
expanding the treatment can contribute meaningfully to public health with early 
diagnosis and treatment, increase longevity and an improvement of the quality of life of 
the persons who live with HIV-related infections. 
