(PEFI algal flora: a half-century of investigation) The survey of the algal flora of the Parque Estadual das 
Fontes do Ipiranga (PEFI) started in 1962, with the disclosure of occurrence of 17 desmid species, collected from the São 
Paulo Botanical Gardens hydrophytoterium. However, in an organized way, it took place only 28 years later, in 1990, with 
the conception of the “Parque Estadual das Fontes do Ipiranga Cryptogamic flora”. The flora is essentially based on material 
gathered from the plankton, periphyton and surface sediments of the PEFI water bodies, and also included samples from 
trees barks, rocks, and soil. Forty-two fascicles of the algal flora have already been published, revealing 869 taxa including 
species, varieties and taxonomic formae. It is estimated that 95% of the local algal flora have already been surveyed and 
that its conclusion will be reached by the end of the year 2020.

First publication dealing with the PEFI, Parque 
Estadual das Fontes do Ipiranga biota most probably 
was the third contribution to the knowledge of the 
Brazilian orchids by Schlechter & Hoehne (1926), 
where the authors listed, among others, 13 species for 
the PEFI area.

Forty-six years elapsed until the publication of the 
first attempt ever to know the PEFI algal biodiversity. 
The pioneers, Bicudo & Bicudo (1962), studied 
material collected from the hydrophytoterium, an 
artificial system designed for display of aquatic plants 
at the São Paulo Botanical Gardens. Seventeen desmid 
species were there disclosed (Closterium cynthia De 
Notaris, C. leibleinii Kützing, C. moniliferum (Bory) 
Ehrenberg, C. navicula (Brébisson) Lütkemuller, C. 
parvulum Nägeli, C. setaceum Ehrenberg, C. venus 
Kützing, Desmidium cylindricum Greville, Euastrum 
ansatum Ehrenberg, E. oblongum (Greville) Ralfs, 
Micrasterias denticulata Brébisson, M. laticeps 
Nordstedt, M. rotata (Greville) Ralfs, Pleurotaenium 
ovatum Nordstedt, P. truncatum (Brébisson) Nägeli, 
Staurastrum cuspidatum Brébisson and S. erlangense 
Reinsch) accompanied by description and illustration. 
Two years later, Bicudo & Bicudo (1965) continued 
their inventory identifying more 23 desmid taxa 
including 16 species and six varieties that are not typical 
of their respective species, and a taxonomic forma also 
not typical, but of its respective variety. Closterium 
gracile Brébisson, C. laterale Nordstedt, C. turgidum 
Ehrenberg var. giganteum Nordstedt, Cosmarium 
ocellatum Eichler & Gutwinski, Desmidium baileyi 
(Ralfs) Nordstedt f. tetragonum Nordstedt, D. 
swartzii C. Agardh var. amblyodon (Itzigsohn) 
Rabenhorst, Micrasterias laticeps Nordstedt var. 
acuminata Krieger, M. pinnatifida (Kützing) Ralfs, 
M. truncata (Corda) Brébisson var. truncata, M. 
truncata (Corda) Brébisson var. excavata Nordstedt, 
Sphaerozosma granulatum Roy & Bisset, Staurastrum 
inaequale Nordstedt, S. punctulatum Brébisson, S. 
quadrangulare Brébisson var. quadrangulare, S. 
quadrangulare Brébisson var. longispinum Börgesen, 
S. rotula Nordstedt, S. trifidum Nordstedt var. tortum 
(Börgesen) Grönblad and Tetmemorus granulatus 
(Brébisson) Ralfs) were then identified accompanied 
by description and illustration for each taxon. Material 
studied was gathered from artificial tanks, ditches 
and rain pools located within the PEFI area, without 
however specified them.

Various other publications followed without, 
however, any organizing plan. In 1990 the “Flora 
Criptogâmica do Parque Estadual das Fontes do 
Ipiranga” (Ipiranga Sources State Park Cryptogamic 
Flora) was created divided into three sections: (1) 
algae, (2) fungi and lichens, and (3) bryophytes. The 
following information summarizes the results from 
the 28 years devoted to the survey of the PEFI algal 
flora.

Study area - Area of present study is the PEFI, Parque 
Estadual das Fontes do Ipiranga (Ipiranga sources 
State Park) located in the southeast region of the 
Municipality São Paulo between parallels 23°38'08''S 
and 23°40'18''S and meridians 43°36'48''W and 
43°36'00''W. PEFI includes the extension of 526.30 ha, 
and the 24 sources of the Ipiranga Creek, that supply 
nine reservoirs locally called lakes. Emphasis should 
be put, because of their size, on the Garças, Cisnes, 
Ninfeias and IAG reservoirs. For more details 
concerning the Garças, Ninfeias and IAG reservoirs, 
please check Bicudo et al. (2002).

Methods - Plankton, periphyton and surface sediments 
material was basically collected. Plankton samples 
were gathered using a cone-shaped net made of a 
± 20 µm mesh nylon fabric, that was successively 
passed as many times as needed in the superficial 30 cm 
layer of the water bodies to gather a macroscopically 
detectable amount of material at the bottom of the 
flask tied to the end of the net. Samples from levels 
located below the surface up to near the system 
bottom, i.e. from the water column were collected 
using a van Dorn sampler. Periphyton samples were 
gathered by collecting littoral plant specimens, which 
were scrapped still in the field or at the laboratory 
with a razor blade or a brush made of marten’s hair, 
in order to obtain the material more closely adhered 
to the substrate. Sometimes, plant specimens were 
manually squeezed to get the material loosely attached 
to their surface. Algae inhabiting ravines living among 
bryophytes or ferns were sampled using suction 
pipets. Rocks, tree trunks and cement walls were also 
scrapped with a spatula used to remove wall painting 
to collect enough material for examination. Material 
inhabiting sediments deposited at reservoir bottoms 
was collected with a van Dorn sampler. Bicudo & 
Menezes (2017) detail all methods mentioned above.

Almost all material collected during the present 
inventory is deposited at the Instituto de Botânica 
Herbarium “Maria Eneyda P. Kauffmann Fidalgo” 
(SP). A few samples were not deposited, because 
for some reason were lost or damaged during the 
examination.

Except for fascicle 18 that encompassed the 
Volvocales (Chlorophyceae) published in the “Revista 
Brasileira de Botânica” (today “Brazilian Journal 
of Botany”), all other fascicles were published in 
“Hoehnea”, that was the journal established for 
publication of the “Flora Ficológica do PEFI” (PEFI 
Algal Flora). Forty-two fascicles were already 
published and it is expected that the flora will be 
completed towards the end of year 2020. Below 
(table 1) with the list of groups already studied and 
the number of taxa identified for each one.

Survey of the PEFI freshwater algae is practically 
completed. It includes over 50 years of random samplings 
accomplished in the PEFI water bodies. The collection 
was made in nine reservoirs (Garças, Ninfeias, IAG, 
Cisnes, Bambus I, Bambus II, Bugios, Monjolo and 
Girinos) locally called “lakes”, the hydrophytoterium (a 
place for exhibition of aquatic plants in the São Paulo 
Botanical Gardens), and a creek (Pirarungáua Creek). 
All those places were visited randomly more than once 
and some of them (Garças, Ninfeias, and IAG) during 
successive months in the case of ecology projects. About 
1,000 sample units were gathered during the 57 years 
duration of present inventory. It is still missing, however, 
the survey of the Radiococcaceae (Chlorophyceae), 
and from the Bacillariophyta are already ready the 
Coscinodiscophyceae and from the Bacillariophyceae, the 
Eunotiaceae, Pinnulariaceae, Cymbellales, Surirellales, 
and Rhopalodiales. Consequently, all other diatom 
groups are until now missing.

Nine hundred and eighty-six samples were 
already collected for the present survey. Ninfeias 
Lake was the PEFI most visited place, with 327 
samples. Follow the Garças Lake with 177 samples, 
the hydrophytoterium with 157, and the IAG Lake 
with 152 samples collected. Ninfeias Lake also is 
the system that encompassed the largest number 
of taxa identified, followed by Garças Lake. The 
hydrophytoterium comes in the third place, but it is 
a very much handled system, to the point that we do 
not know anymore its real floristic composition.

Plankton material (423) represents the largest 
number of samples, followed by periphyton (294), 
benthos (54), and the surface sediments (28). A sampling 
of soil material, epiphyton, tree trunks, and epilithon 
was also carried out in a smaller, but appropriate scale. 
It is very important to comment that gathering of 
periphytic material contributed to the knowledge with 
approximately 40% of total PEFI’s inventoried taxa, 
which would not be inventoried if only plankton material 
was collected. Another kind of sample that contributed 
significantly to the survey of the PEFI algal flora, mostly 
of the diatoms and non-pigmented euglenoids, was that 
of reservoirs’ surface sediments.

Sixteen algal classes had representatives 
documented for the PEFI area. There are presently 
surveyed 869 taxa, including species, varieties, and 
taxonomic formae. We believe that c. 95% of all taxa 
occurring in the PEFI area was already inventoried. 
Chlorophyceae are the richest group in terms of 
number of species. Addition of the Radiococcaceae to 
the total number of taxa will certainly be very small. 
Following, are the Zygnematophyceae with 167 taxa, 
whose survey is already concluded for the PEFI area. 
In the third place, are the Bacillariophyceae with 115 
taxa, but this number for sure does not represent the 
participation of this algal group in the total number of 
taxa identified for the Park. Chlorophyceae includes a 
high number of genera, however, just a few of them 
with a high number of species. Zygnematophyceae do 
not include as many genera as the Chlorophyceae, but 
two of them (Cosmarium and Staurastrum) presented 
a high number of species in the Park, making high the 
class total number of taxa. The Bacillariophyceae surely 
includes the World largest number of taxa, and that 
considerable species-rich groups are still to be surveyed.

The highest species, varieties and taxonomic 
formae numbers identified during this research called 
our attention. However, it may be explained first because 
of the enormous sampling effort represented by more 
than 50 years of intensive gathering. Duration of the 
sampling period surely implies the identification of 
a higher number of taxa. During the present survey, 
besides the sampling effort, obviously also interfered 
with the PEFI high taxonomic richness the sampling 
in the different water bodies compartments represented 
by the investigation of the plankton, periphyton and the 
surface sediments of semilentic systems (reservoirs). The 
last two compartments contributed nearly 40% to the 
total number of taxa of present flora. The scenery above 
undoubtedly led to the inventory of the most complete 
freshwater algal flora ever carried out in Brazil.

A flora is not one-man product. It is team work. Our 
most sincere thanks to the 20 professional researchers 
and the 19 students that helped materialization up to 
now of the “PEFI Algal Flora”.
