Publication status: Preprint has been submitted for publication in journal
Brazilian’s Foreign Policy and Health (1995-2010): A policy
analysis of the Brazilian Health Diplomacy – from Aids to ‘Zero
Hunger’ 
Celia Maria de Almeida, Thaisa Santos Lima, Rodrigo Pires de Campos
https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4763
Submitted on: 2022-09-19
Posted on: 2022-09-21 (version 1)
(YYYY-MM-DD)
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
1 
 
Brazilian’s Foreign Policy and Health (1995-2010): A policy analysis of the Brazilian 
Health Diplomacy – from Aids to ‘Zero Hunger’ () 
Política Externa e Saúde no Brasil (1995-2010): Uma análise da Diplomacia de Saúde 
brasileira - da Aids ao ‘Fome Zero’ 
 
Abstract  
This article examines how health entered Brazilian foreign policy between 1995 and 2010 and 
the factors that allowed it to support the country's international presence. This issue is rarely 
examined in the literature on Brazilian health diplomacy. We analyze the specificities of this 
process within a policy analysis approach. By drawing on literature review, document analysis 
and key-actor interviews, we revise policies that were triggered by far-reaching and complex 
historical processes of change in Brazil. The article points to significant interrelationships 
between foreign policy and social policy, including health. Only during Lula governments 
(2003-2010) did health actually enter the foreign policy agenda, in significant support of 
Brazil’s growing international presence. Brazil’s internationalisation of its domestic policies 
connected with South-South cooperation exerted a central role. These developments were made 
possible by the activism and commitment of a variety of State and non-State actors who acted 
on at least two lines: national and transnational advocacy, and coordinated activities of Brazilian 
diplomats and government representatives, in collaboration with civil society activists. 
Institutional arrangements shifted in different conjunctures and were adjusted in a process 
permanently prone to conflicts and moves. 
 
Keywords: Foreign policy and health. International relations and health. Health diplomacy. 
Brazil. 
 
Resumo  
Este artigo examina como a saúde entrou na política externa brasileira entre 1995 e 2010 e os 
fatores que possibilitaram apoiar a sustentação da presença internacional do país. Essa questão 
raramente é examinada na literatura brasileira sobre diplomacia da saúde. Analisamos as 
especificidades desse processo por meio de uma abordagem de análise de políticas. Utilizamos 
revisão de literatura, de documentos e entrevistas com atores-chave para rediscutir as políticas 
desencadeadas por complexos e amplos processos históricos de mudança no Brasil. O artigo 
aponta importantes inter-relações entre política externa e política social, incluindo saúde. 
Somente durante os governos Lula (2003-2010) a saúde entrou de fato na agenda da política 
externa, em apoio significativo à crescente presença internacional do Brasil. A 
internacionalização das políticas domésticas brasileiras vinculadas à cooperação Sul-Sul 
exerceu papel central. Esses desenvolvimentos foram possibilitados pelo ativismo e 
comprometimento de diversos atores estatais e não estatais que atuaram em pelo menos duas 
linhas: advocacia nacional e transnacional e atividades coordenadas entre diplomatas brasileiros 
e representantes do governo, em colaboração com atores da sociedade civil. Os arranjos 
institucionais mudaram em diferentes conjunturas e foram ajustados em um processo propenso 
permanentemente a conflitos e mudanças. 
 
Palavras-chave: Política externa e saúde. Relações internacionais e saúde. Diplomacia da 
saúde. Brasil. 
 
 
 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4763
2 
 
Introduction 
In the first decade of the 21st century, Brazil has earned a place as an emerging world 
power and one of the largest and most promising economies in the world. The country has also 
been very active in ‘health diplomacy’ and has played an increasingly leading role in 
international health arenas. 
The extensive literature on Brazilian health diplomacy rarely offers analyses of the 
relationship between foreign policy and health or health and international relations. Although 
they relate dynamics at the national level to those at the international or global level, which 
undeniably helps to establish the topic and encourages more in-depth analysis, these literatures 
are usually concerned with decision-making in international arenas or with actions of social 
movements on specific issues (e.g., HIV/AIDS) and their relations with the state (especially the 
executive branch) and international organisations. 
From a policy analysis perspective, the links between health and international relations 
in Brazil are relatively new1,2. It is important that such analysis takes into account the historical, 
contextual, and dynamic elements of the political system, as well as the different governmental 
conjunctures2. Similarly, national policies aimed at ‘global health’ are the result of negotiations 
involving a variety of actors from the health, social development, and foreign policy sectors3,4. 
Foreign policy is a public policy at the intersection of domestic and international policy5, 
6,7. It is conditioned by the asymmetric order – the system of states and global capitalism – in 
which it is embedded8,9. It is produced within the state and its “formulation and implementation 
fall within the dynamics of governmental decisions, which in turn result from negotiations 
within coalitions, bargaining, disputes, and agreements between representatives of different 
interests”10(278). Accordingly, like any public policy, it is not only a terrain for conflict, but can 
also change with each government. 
Most authors (and actors) understand health diplomacy (or ‘global health diplomacy’) 
to mean advocacy for specific issues, policies, or actions related to various dimensions of health 
on the international stage, pursued by any actor, government or otherwise, without necessarily 
equating it with the foreign policy of nation-states or the diplomacy of a country as such. The 
conceptual vagueness of the term favours its use for different purposes, and the meaning of the 
term depends on the chosen perspective of analysis and the object of study. In this perspective, 
health diplomacy is a policy-shaping process in which governmental, nongovernmental, and 
other institutional actors negotiate responses to health challenges or use health concepts or 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4763
3 
 
mechanisms in policy-making and negotiation strategies to achieve other political, economic, 
or social goals11,12,13,14,15,16. 
This study examines how health issues entered Brazilian foreign policy and the factors 
that allowed these health issues to support the country's international presence, especially 
between 1995 and 2010. The objective is to capture the specificities of Brazilian health 
diplomacy and its role at home and abroad by analytically reviewing the data, events, and 
analyses of the policies that were triggered at different moments by processes of political 
change in Brazil. It does not ignore the differences between foreign policy and sectoral policies 
(in this case, social policy, including health policy). It does, however, point to significant 
interrelationships between them in order to understand what has been called ‘Brazil's health 
diplomacy’.  
The research relied on a literature review of primary and secondary sources, including 
reports and websites from governmental and nongovernmental organisations, as well as a 
triangulation of perceptions obtained through interviews with key Brazilian policymakers, 
public health officials, and civil society regarding Brazilian health issues in foreign policy. Most 
interviews were conducted in 2017 and 2018, with a few more in subsequent years (2019 and 
2020). 
The study covers a rare period of stable democracy in Brazil, encompassing the centre-
right (PSDB) governments of 1995-2002 under Fernando Henrique Cardoso (FHC) of the 
Social Democratic Party (Partido Social Democrata, PSDB) and the centre-left of 2003-2010 
under Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva (Lula) of the Workers' Party (Partido dos Trabalhadores, PT). 
Both leaders, each in their own way, sought greater international influence and relied on 
different political coalitions. They initiated changes in Brazil's international relations by, on the 
one hand, reviewing certain historical parameters of Brazilian foreign policy, on the other, 
working to help the country achieve a prominent position and visibility in the international 
system. 
The main argument of the article is that national and international policies are 
intertwined in this process, and that domestic dynamics and societal engagement are of great 
importance but not sufficient. Government decisions based on values and principles and 
supported by political coalitions that change at moments shape the perception of the country's 
‘place’ in the global system dynamics and determine its activities in international arenas. 
Accordingly, the non-material (symbolic and interpretive) components of foreign policy and 
their inclusion in the decision-making process are important variables. These factors enable the 
construction of different international scenarios, depending on how decision-makers perceive 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4763
4 
 
them and how a particular national ‘heritage’ is emphasised in international negotiations 
according to national practises or ideological perspectivesi. 
The first part of the paper provides a historical overview of Brazilian foreign policy 
(BFP) and international relations from the late 1980s to the FHC and Lula administrations. It 
then examines the linkages between social policies (including health policies) at home and the 
foreign policies of these governments. The concluding remarks provide a brief analytical 
summary of the findings and suggestions for future research. 
Brazil's Foreign Policy and International Positioning under Presidents FHC and Lula 
Brazilian foreign policy (BFP) has traditionally focused on international ‘prestige’ 
rather than ‘contestation’8, enjoying the support-neither unconditional nor lasting-of the 
country’s elitesii. Under the authoritarian regime of military rule, which lasted from 1964 to 
1985, Brazil's international posture tended to be defensive and discreet, particularly about 
human rights and other sensitive issues. Political change in the mid-1980s and global changes 
after the end of the Cold War gradually transformed the Brazilian model of economic 
development, the dynamics of society, and the formulation and implementation of national 
policy, including foreign policy, which had traditionally been ‘insulated’ within the diplomatic 
corps17(315-316). 
Historically, the BFP was central to the models of economic development that 
governments have adopted at different points in time, notably in critical junctures as in the mid-
1960s, the 1990s, and again since 2016. At these moments, “prevailing patterns of national 
development and international presence are becoming exhausted, and a new sociopolitical 
coalition emerges”18(46), transforming both domestic and foreign policy. However, the 
persistence of a single and consensual model of development does not mean that there is 
consensus on the political dimension of foreign policy, i.e., sometimes “foreign policy can may 
be a target for far-reaching review without any change in political regime”9(424;426). 
The re-democratisation of Brazil in the 1980s required, among other things, that 
Brazilian diplomacy become more ‘active’ in developing and implementing an agenda that 
would provide domestic legitimacy to Brazil’s international positions and intentions, while also 
allowing it to build national coalitions that would favour a change in the status quo19,18,17,8. This 
dynamic meant that the former ‘decision-making autonomy’ of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
decreased, while ‘presidential diplomacy’ increased: Presidents actively participated in the 
decision-making processes of the BFP. At the same time, political coalitions became 
increasingly important in Brazil, forming a system known as ‘coalitional presidentialism’20, 21. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4763
5 
 
The partisan political system institutionalised in the 1988 Constitution, combined with 
presidentialism, gave the president power in setting the agenda and in negotiations, while 
imposing on him the enormous and difficult task of creating governability among legislature 
and ruling elites in order to implement his governmental program, within big political 
coalitions. Given the characteristics of the Brazilian political system – a multiplicity parties, 
low loyalty and high fragmentation, and rather unorthodox practises among deputies – the 
president's ability to coordinate relations between the executive and legislative branches 
became fundamental. 
As a result of the increasing ‘politicisation’, BFP became an important issue, reflecting 
the increasingly strong interrelations between the national and the international spheres in the 
context of a globalised world8. This whole process also revealed different groups within the 
diplomatic corps (Itamaratyiii) itself, previously considered ‘monolithic’ and for several years 
‘had a virtual monopoly’ on expertise in international affairs17(316), as well as in the executive 
branch and in the coalitions in the legislature that supported the heads of government. 
Another salient feature of the BFP (throughout the twentieth century and in the first 
decades of the twenty-first) was the recognition of multilateral spaces (institutions and arenas) 
as the preferred venue for Brazil's diplomatic activitiesiv, as well as its role as a mediator 
between North and South, always respecting the principle of non-interference, which implies 
certain concessions and the use of soft power24,8. This meant that BFP was able to increase its 
political power through policies of principles, values, culture, and achievements, as well as 
through collaboration with a wide range of actors. 
The BFP has always sought the international recognition of Brazil, considering the 
country “naturally” qualified for a prominent place in the international system18,25. However, 
over the years, the strategies to achieve this goal varied with the changes of government. There 
were times when this ambition cooled or was even abandoned18,8,25,26,27,28. 
Some authors are critics to the claim that Brazil’s autonomy in the global arena has 
always been a feature of the BFP29,8,25. They argue that, though it has existed, it was of limited 
autonomy in “exceptional moments and breaks in the dependent development of foreign 
policy”; moments that “could be interrupted by conservative forces”8(42-43). 
In the 1990s, ‘social issues’ were widely discussed on the international stage, especially 
at the UN conferences from 1990 to 1996, in order to ‘rethink development’, whether because 
of the alarming levels of poverty and inequality in the world that had resulted from the economic 
adjustments of the 1980s, or because of the need to seek alternatives to Welfare State policies 
that were not tailored to the new post-Cold War (neoliberal) economic realities. The UN 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4763
6 
 
conferences, the central locus for construction of its social agenda involving a wide range of 
state and non-state actors, brought out these concerns and reinforced the involvement of actors 
from civil society, local governments, and others outside traditional diplomatic circles in 
international debates. Brazil extensively participated in such conferences30,31.  
These international dynamics mirror and project domestic movements: the campaign for 
health sector reform in Brazil – driven by preventive medicine and public health professionals 
along with health professional unions and opposition political parties – dates back to the 
1970s32,33, while the movement to combat the HIV/AIDS epidemic, focused on human rights 
and solidarity and networked with other social movements (feminists, advocates of the ‘sexual 
option’) that espoused the same principles, had been ongoing since the 1980s34,35,36,37,38,23. 
Finally, governments’ choices, social and political forces and systemic factors – 
geopolitical shifts (end of the bipolar era) and geoeconomic changes (hegemony of the United 
States in crisis and rise of China) – have given more space to countries on the periphery of the 
international arena, possibly by relieving them of ‘structural conditioning factors’8. This 
allowed foreign policy to leverage the power of the state through the mobilisation of its 
institutional structure and managerial capabilities, thus leveraging domestic resources for 
international purposes8,29. 
In the same dynamic, the processes of internationalisation of economies (globalisation 
and economic liberalisation/opening) and democratisation of societies (intensification of debate 
among social actors on ideas and ways of institutionalising demands) – which also occurred in 
Brazil – were among the factors that contributed to the ‘politicisation’ of public policies, 
including foreign policy9. The increased complexity of policymaking that resulted from these 
arrangements also encouraged other government agencies and civil society institutions to 
become more involved in shaping and implementing domestic and foreign policy. 
There is an intense debate in the Brazilian literature about whether foreign policies of 
FHC and Lula represent continuity or innovation. Within the debate, there is some consensus 
on continuities and changes. 
Some authors generally see foreign policy processes as continuing unbroken between 
the two administrations, with only adjustments in goals and programmes19,39, and this includes 
the priority given to health40. Others have noted that Lula extended the changes that had taken 
place in BFP during FHC governments and also benefited from a more favourable national and 
international economic situation18,8,9. The main argument in the literature is for continuity in 
the historical paradigms of BFP, although under different traditions in Brazilian diplomacy41 v 
that shaped FHC and Lula’s respective foreign policies accordingly. Meanwhile, both 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4763
7 
 
governments accommodated social currents, and both are often perceived as having sought 
greater autonomy for Brazil in its international activities39. However, some analysts believe that 
foreign policy only exhibited autonomist traits under Lula8,25. 
The critical global conjuncture of the 1990s, marked by the end of the Cold War and the 
spread of macroeconomic structural adjustment processes worldwide (and, in Brazil, by a new 
constitutional political order and a state in financial crisis), led the Brazilian economic elite to 
embrace at home the ‘orthodox neoliberalism’ adopted by the FHC government. Two agendas 
– currency stabilisation (Real Plan) and reform of the 1988 constitution – were particularly 
important in the first FHC government. 
Thus, the FHC government’s foreign policy goal was to restore Brazil's international 
credibility by abandoning the ‘Third World thesis’ and previous alliances39,42,8 and, 
accordingly, “giving less normative weight to motivations of solidarity and identification with 
countries of the South”8. Alignment with prevailing international trends was an instrument of 
macroeconomic stabilisation policy. Domestically, policies of trade liberalisation and 
privatisation were sought. Externally, a rapprochement with Western powers, including the 
United States, and with international regimes (e.g., in the areas of human rights, security, and 
nuclear proliferation) was pursued. The formulation of this strategy dates from the 1990s, 
during Itamar Franco’s government, when Cardoso was foreign minister (October 1992 to May 
1993) and then finance minister (May 1993 to March 1994). Moving away from Mercosul 
regional interests, FHC’s foreign policy advocated greater flexibility in the form of free trade 
agreements with countries outside the region (e.g., in the European Union). 
The government considered that, given the “international political and economic 
context”, it was “unrealistic” to address or raise discussions structural determinants of social 
inequalities; it would be more productive to mobilise developed countries to support the 
Brazilian agenda, i.e., to contribute (financially) to solving the country’s problems, in return for 
Brazil’s support of their policies30. From this perspective, Brazil should accept the rules of the 
game and strive to develop “ways to legitimise its own positions” on economic development 
within those rules and “solve its internal problems”43(14-15). 
International cooperation was not a priority or was of little importance in BFP during 
FHC governments30, except with respect to AIDS, which had special features discussed below. 
Another important feature of this period was the ‘presidential diplomacy’, or the increasing 
presence of the president in diplomatic activities.  
President FHC enjoyed great support and prestige among the Brazilian elitevi. However, 
his economic and political strategies did not produce the desired results. The ‘Real Plan’ 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4763
8 
 
(introduced in 1994) had stabilised the currency, but by the early 2000s, the country’s economic 
situation (fiscal adjustment without economic growth; growing unemployment, poverty and 
inequality; and exchange rate and currency crises in 2002), and political scenario (deterioration 
of living and working conditions) had worsened, led Brazil to fall into considerable disrepute 
internationally, and to the election of Lula, the candidate of PT, in 200239,8,25. 
Lula expanded macroeconomic adjustment policies by introducing a new (third) stage 
of fiscal and monetary stabilisation based on the neoliberal paradigm44. However, he adopted a 
‘neo-developmentalist’ approach45,8, especially from 2006 onwards, by strengthening the 
internal market and seeking complementarity between economic and social policies towards an 
‘economy managed by social spending’44,46. This was expressed in the adoption of mechanisms 
that complemented the universal approach and introduced “conditionalities in the design of 
specific policies”47. 
Foreign policy under Lula was characterised by the pursuit of ‘political autonomy’, 
which required that  
[…] claim to international leadership, but with the intention of challenging 
existing global rules; an orientation of rule-making rather than rule-taking; a 
more long-term perspective on North-South geopolitical divides; and a 
posture of active solidarity with similar countries in the South and integration 
with neighbours in the region.”8(42). 
Its basic premises were to emphasize the inherent contradictions of globalisation and to 
exploit any room for manoeuvre left by the dispersion of international power as U.S. hegemony 
began to erode. That is, to open new opportunities for action abroad to advance Brazil's 
interests, whether through development or advancement within the world system. The 
prevailing diagnosis was that the world order was in transition and tending toward 
multipolarity42,8, thus in need of a diversity of alliances both in the South American region and 
with other emerging or developing countries. 
Emphasis was placed on ‘strategic partnerships’ or building coalitions with ‘variable 
geometry’42, i.e., closer relations with emerging countries to make Brazil more representative 
and strengthen the less powerful countries for which Brazil was to become a ‘mouthpiece’42(178). 
To this end, BFP promoted activities in narrower forums, proposing and supporting the creation 
of new institutions (IBAS in 2003, BRICS in 2006, and Unasul in 2008) and strengthening 
existing institutions (Mercosul). In the South American region, the BFP sought to link Brazil's 
prosperity with that of its neighbours in order to mitigate the structural asymmetry between 
them. In short, it advocated multidimensional diplomacy, involving simultaneous actions in 
different areas at the global, regional, and bilateral levels. At the same time, significant 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4763
9 
 
diplomatic efforts were made to establish a social agenda on the international stage, in which 
the issue of health played a prominent role. 
The trade interests of large national corporations and conglomerates were projected 
outward48,49. These potentially contradictory goals were received critically and defensively – or 
at best suspiciously – in some countries in the region. 
Presidential diplomacy intensified and closer ties were forged between the President and 
the Chancellor (Celso Amorim, a recognised and respected diplomat), with both playing leading 
roles in both Lula administrations. Together, they made numerous international visits and 
regional trips (e.g., to South America and Africa)vii, new embassies were established (especially 
in countries and regions not previously favoured), and the president took a much more 
prominent role in a number of global forums. Similarly, the number of training positions for 
diplomats was significantly increased at the Rio Branco Instituteviii, where new specialties were 
introduced to address social issues in general and health care in particular (Itamaraty key player 
interview). 
Brazil's participation in negotiations and decisions that were considered ‘highly 
political1 (e.g., on international security issues, such as UN peacekeeping missions that led to 
MINUSTHAix) drew much criticism, especially from those who favoured a more conservative 
foreign policyx. Brazil's bid for a permanent seat on the UN Security Council was also upheld. 
The policy of international cooperation (South-South and triangular) expanded 
significantly and gained strategic importance, driven both by Brazil's improving economic 
conditions and by the internationalisation of national policies50,49. From then on, technical, 
political, and economic cooperation was pursued as a tool to strengthen alliances and coalitions 
between countries with perceived similar levels of development and aspirations. In the second 
Lula administration, the increase in the budget of the Brazilian Cooperation Agency (ABC) was 
an indicator of this dynamic. BFP refused to consider Brazil as a ‘donor’ country, according to 
OECD parameters, and understood South-South cooperation as solidarity and a commitment to 
mutual aid among countries of the Global South (particularly South America and the Caribbean, 
and Africa). 
The foreign policy debate was significantly renewed in Brazil, and other actors in the 
federal structure and organised civil society gained prominence in national and international 
issues51. 
Brazil's international positioning changed significantly as it pursued considerable 
economic and political internationalisation, referred to as ‘dual internationalisation’8(48-49). In 
the economic sphere, industrial and technological development policies were implemented at 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4763
10 
 
home, while leading national companies were actively promoted abroad, driving the 
competitiveness of agricultural and mining products in the world market and confirmed the 
vocation of BFP as a promoter of development8,25. Policy changes also took place at these two 
levels: domestically, it was about broadening the social base by expanding political citizenship 
and including the most vulnerable groups through consumption. Internationally, it was about 
broadening participation in a variety of global forums and negotiating arenas in multiple areas 
to support proposals to review and reform multilateral institutions (e.g., the UN Security 
Council), but without radicalism. 
The external projection of national social inclusion policies deserves attention here. 
Social Concerns and Foreign Policy in the FHC and Lula Governments 
There is relative agreement in the literature that the social policy innovations in the FHC 
governments have been maintained by Lula governments, albeit with different shades and 
emphases. It is also affirmed that none of the governments of this period changed the universal 
principles and institutional framework of the Brazilian social protection system. 
Social policy in the FHC governments 
Social policy guidelines of FHC combined the restructuring of universal social services 
and the alleviation of poverty and inequality with specific redistributive measures, especially 
targeted equalisation programmes52,53. This decision was inspired by the ‘targeting within 
universalism’ approach54,52. 
Social policies were only partially compensatory, being subordinated to the needs of 
budgetary adjustment. Some innovations fragmented poverty reduction efforts at federal and 
local levels leading to ‘indirect privatisations’55 that became a fixture in subsequent decades, 
including public-private partnerships for the delivery of health services (in the SUS xi. The new 
programmes, however, were unable to offset for the losses. 
Relationships with social movements at national level – particularly those related to 
AIDS – became visible abroad and fostered transnational activism, bringing about major 
changes in global policy towards controlling the AIDS epidemic34,35,37,23. In multilateral forums 
(WHO, UNDP and Unaids), a great ‘militancy’ was observed by representatives of the federal 
bureaucracy together with other non-state actors, both aimed at supporting the demand for 
HAART (highly active triple antiretroviral therapy) at national and international levels. 
Brazilian diplomacy had won important victories in this process56. Since 1986, it had 
played a leading role in the drafting and approval of the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects 
of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) in 1994, advocating for developing countries, building 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4763
11 
 
supportive coalitions, and resisting unilateral U.S. ambitions. This agreement concluded the 
Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and established the 
WTO that same year.xii 
Meanwhile, in 1996, FHC enacted two conflicting laws: the Universal Access to 
HAART Act (SUS) and the new Patent Act23. The former law institutionalised early treatment 
for AIDS and HIV-positive individuals and prioritised the problem of effective nationwide 
coverage and associated financing, responding to the demands of community activists and the 
technocracy. The latter, in turn, favoured the countries and companies that held the relevant 
patents, thus hindering domestic production of generic drugs, although it provided for the 
possibility of compulsory licencing. This domestic duality and ambivalence were consistent 
with FHC government's international approach. 
This interpretation is supported by the victories of Brazilian diplomacy over the United 
States in the WTO in the dispute over patents (2001) and over agricultural subsidies (2003). 
Cooperation between actors from the Itamaraty and other ministries was fundamental in both 
processes, as well as the support from national and transnational civil society43,23. However, 
there were doubts about the effectiveness of the TRIPS agreement. “When the TRIPS was 
signed [in 1994], many of us thought it was a defeat, but [at least] we had managed to maintain 
certain ambiguities [...] Still, it is always a struggle, it is not easy” (Itamaraty key actor 
interview). 
Brazilian diplomats did not focus on the health sector when drafting and signing the 
TRIPS. Only later the importance of compulsory licensing for the production of generic drugs 
was recognized, when conditions changed, and mainly because of the issue of access to 
medicines against AIDS: “health issues were a technical matter [...] They were considered when 
there was an interface with diplomacy, but only marginally, with no great diplomatic 
importance attached to them [...] They were not of central importance from the point of view of 
official foreign policy” (Itamaraty key actor interview). 
This view changed during discussions leading up to the Fourth Ministerial Conference 
(Qatar, 2001), which adopted the Doha Declaration allowing compulsory licencing of 
medicines in public health emergenciesxiii. “When the Doha Round was launched [in 2001], the 
world had changed, especially through AIDS [...] all this coincided with and inspired the tactics 
of the Doha Round [...] the ambiguities became flexibilities and were embodied in the 
Declaration.” (Itamaraty key actor interview). 
Various international initiatives in different forums and organisations supported the 
proposal for early treatment of AIDS37,23. International organisations and developing countries 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4763
12 
 
increasingly adhered to the policy of universal treatment while transnational advocacy efforts 
increased. Even ARV major pharmaceutical manufacturers appear to have bowed to demands 
and pressures for lower prices and voluntary licencing of certain products in certain countries23, 
especially under the “threat of compulsory licencing and production of generics skilfully used 
by Brazilian diplomacy in negotiations at the WTO” (Itamaraty key actor interview). 
José Serra’s tenure in the Ministry of Health (MoH) (1998-2002) had positive aspects 
in addition to the institutional stabilityxiv. He did not take over the MoH at his own request but 
accepted the post to further his electoral ambitionsxv. His performance as minister was 
characterised by the fact that he used the technical possibilities in this area to make his political 
mark. This occurred, for example, during questions on the 2000 annual report of WHO, which 
ranked member states' health systems based on a composite performance index in which Brazil 
(and other countries) performed quite poorly and whose methodology was strongly 
questioned57,58 xvi, and also during discussions on the dispute over patents and access to AIDS 
medicines59,60. 
Interviews with key stakeholders confirmed that the minister was fighting ‘personal 
battles’ to gain visibility and support for his election campaign. Nevertheless, he is credited for 
his important participation in international forums, where he even advocated positions that 
differed from those of the government, allied himself with other efforts of Brazilian diplomacy, 
and helped to strengthen Brazil’s presence and prestige in the international arena, especially 
through events related to AIDS. 
[...] Serra is an economist, and he was the minister of health...The issue of 
generics was his field [...] There was an important coincidence: Serra at the 
MoH and Celso Amorim in Geneva [...] Amorim had previous experience, he 
had worked in the Ministry of Science and Technology [1977-1989], he had 
witnessed the discussion on patents, had been involved in the resistance to the 
patent law when the Americans had forced us to make changes, since the time 
of the Sarney government [mid-1980s], pressure that intensified during the 
Collor government [1990s] [....], and came back to these issues in 1999-2000, 
when he returned to Geneva and the issue was ‘revived’.” (Itamaraty key actor 
interview) 
[…] I do not mean to say that Itamaraty was against or did not support local 
production of medicines, but at the time it was not determined enough to push 
this forward (MoH key actor interview). 
International technical cooperation on HIV/AIDS played an important role in Brazilian 
health diplomacy. It was one of the objectives of the Brazilian National Programme and was 
institutionalised as part of the strategy to give international visibility to the Brazilian experience. 
This visibility was made possible by the World Bank loans AIDS I (1994-1998) and AIDS II 
(1999-2003), and promoted by the creation of the United Nations Joint Programme on 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4763
13 
 
HIV/AIDS (Unaids), established in 199461. This allowed not only the institutionalisation of the 
national programme, but also the implementation of triangular agreements for collaboration, 
that is, cooperation between Brazil and developing countries supported by aid donors, a 
traditional model for international cooperation in Brazil62,50,61. 
Cooperation on AIDS was first formalised with the creation of the Horizontal Technical 
Cooperation Group on HIV/AIDS (HTCG) in 1996.The Group brought together several AIDS 
national coordinators, mainly from South American countries, under the leadership of the 
Brazilian National Programme. It also collaborated with Unaids61. The HTCG established direct 
links with national programme directors without going through official Ministry of Health 
channels, such as the Advisory Service on International Health Issues (Assessoria de Assuntos 
International de Saúde, AISA), formally established in 1998 under the Minister of Health 
Office. Contacts with the Itamaraty's Cooperation Agency (Agência Brasileira de Cooperação, 
ABC) were purely administrative. Meanwhile, discussions began under these arrangements on 
the ‘horizontal’ (South-South) principles and values that would later define Brazilian 
cooperation. 
Brazil’s experience was showcased at the 13th International Conference AIDS in 
Durban (July 9-14, 2000), where positions of international agencies were challenged and a new 
global consensus was proposed. It was then argued that it was possible to increase production 
of antiretroviral drugs stimulating competition and drug price reductions63,64,65, attracting the 
attention of the Minister of Health (José Serra). At the same event, Brazilian professionals 
offered to the world the technical cooperation of Brazil on AIDS as an alternative to traditional 
technical cooperation of international organisations and agencies61. 
The Brazilian report to the Conference was well received both in Brazil and 
internationally, contributing to strengthen the collaboration between the MoH and Itamaraty for 
the elaboration of the Brazilian position at the 2001 Special Session of the UN General 
Assembly in New York (UNGASS-AIDS), with the participation of other Brazilian agencies. 
This evidence was used to coordinate positions and interventions of the countries of the South 
at UNGASS, which eventually endorsed universal access to antiretroviral drugs. As a result, 
Brazilian professionals joined UNAIDS teams, and the first global civil society organisations 
were created – the Global Network of People Living with HIV (GNP+) and the International 
Council of AIDS Service Organisations (ICASO)61. 
In 2002, the MoH and Itamaraty launched the International Cooperation Programme for 
HIV Control and Prevention Activities in Developing Countries (Programa de Cooperação 
Internacional para Ações de Controle e Prevenção do HIV para Países em Desenvolvimento, 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4763
14 
 
PCI), which, in conjunction with the national programme, consolidated the Brazilian technical 
cooperation on HIV/AIDS. 
Social policies in the Lula governments 
During Lula governments, previous policies were continued, but with fundamental 
changes. Social policies promoted the improvement of living conditions for the poorest 
populations and regions, gaining political and electoral support of a different population group 
other than the social movements and unions that normally formed the party's base66,67. However, 
this did not change the structural conditioning factors and determinants of poverty and 
inequality68,53,66. 
In short, social policies of PT governments were based on conditional cash transfers 
through the Family Allowance Programme (Bolsa Família, BF). Starting in 2003, the 
Programme combined all existing programmes with the aim to overcoming absolute and 
relative poverty of millions of Brazilians while linking this to health and education. 
The BF was connected to the National Social Assistance Policy to combat poverty and 
the increase in extreme poverty, which has been formulated since the 1990s through intense 
discussions and civil society mobilisation processesxvii. According to Eclac69programmes such 
as the BF are part of a ‘second generation’ of social policies in Latin America, due to limited 
progress in poverty reduction since the 1990s. 
The BF added value to the existent cash transfer programme. It served around 28% of 
the population (in 2016) and was closely targeted, ensuring the reduction of poverty and 
extreme poverty70. However, BF did not come to constitute a right and could easily be 
discontinued or interrupted53,66. A second successful strategy was to raise the minimum wage, 
and consequently the value of social security benefitsxviii, making them a powerful redistributive 
instrument53. In short, Lula’s income policies, associated with monetary stability and the 
resumption of economic growth (in the second government), fostered an increase in formal 
employment opportunities71,68,66. 
In health care, implementation of the SUS continued with rhetorical political support 
from the President, while underfunding worsened with the suspension of the CPMF in 2007. 
Nevertheless, Brazil's international reputation was promoted and strengthened by the principles 
of a universal public health system and the compulsory licence granted in 2008 for the 
production of the antiretroviral drug Efavirenz. 
Although Lula’s government did not change the concept and strategy of international 
cooperation at AIDS, its implementation was expanded and diversified with the significant 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4763
15 
 
participation of the Itamaraty and its agency, as international South-South cooperation was 
henceforth given great importance in BFP. 
The implementation of the third World Bank loan (AIDS III, 2004-2007)xix made it 
possible to expand the directorate of the national programme to include “consultative functions” 
and to expand triangular collaboration with international agencies and new donors61. A 
memorandum of understanding between the two ministries – MoH and Itamaraty – in 2005 
formalised more effective Itamaraty operations61.  
The joint efforts of the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
to support technical cooperation on HIV/AIDS [especially in 2005-2006], 
which were very well coordinated and organised, included dialogue with 
other government sectors and a number of other countries to disseminate this 
policy worldwide. (MoH key actor interview). 
The National AIDS Programme successfully applied to be the Unaids Technical Support 
Facility, enabling the establishment of the International Centre for Technical Cooperation on 
HIV/AIDS (ICTC) in 2005. The ICTC brought together different Brazilian and international 
institutions and organisations, operating as a ‘collaborative network with shared governance’61. 
Implementation of cooperation by the national programme with such a broader partnership and 
funding required a high coordination effort. 
[...] The issue was the production and distribution of medicines and a 
worldwide discussion on patents. This was the time when coordination was at 
its best, because when the national agenda arrived at the international level, 
it was well structured and in line with what the two sectors [health and 
diplomacy] had decided together. (MoH key actor interview). 
From 2007 to 2010, there were regular working meetings with the Minister of 
Foreign Affairs on health issues. This was an important qualitative change. I 
would also like to highlight the joint government activities (agencies, 
Ministries of Commerce, Science and Technology, and Health, the Diplomatic 
Service, the Attorney General's Office, the Federal Court of Audit...) in 
developing coherent strategies towards sound policy decisions that could not 
be challenged in court [for example, the compulsory licensing of Efavirenz]. 
(MoH key actor interview). 
The external funding enabled ICTC to pay better external professionals as consultants 
to meet different countries’ cooperation needs, which led to institutional friction within the 
MoH. On the other hand, international partners’ agendas interfered in the Brazilian cooperation 
decision making process. 
In 2009 the MoH was restructured internally: the National Department of Sexual 
Transmissible Diseases (STDs/AIDS) and Viral Hepatitis was set up together under the 
National Health Surveillance Secretariat and changes were made to the World Bank-funded 
activities (AIDS-SUS); these changes were directed to planning horizontality and promote 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4763
16 
 
integration among levels of government, gradually altering how AIDS control was conducted 
institutionally. It was within that department that conflicts began to arise in the ministry’s 
techno-bureaucracy (MoH key-actor interview). The change did not affect how the programme 
was conducted at that moment and the department continued to work together with the social 
movements. “The National AIDS programme funded events directed to reducing stigma and 
discrimination (e.g., gay parades) through the Programme of Actions and Goals, whose funds 
were transferred to states and municipalities.” (MoH key-actor interview). 
Efforts to align cooperation on AIDS with ABC/Itamaraty practises, using the national 
programme’s experience and capacity for dialogue mediation and leadership at home and 
abroad, were not well received by international actors, which hampered the country's 
autonomous decision-making in this area. Thus, in 2010, when the second Memorandum of 
Understanding with Unaids expired, the Brazilian government decided to break with the model. 
From then on, the ICTC was to be managed by ABC/Itamaraty, while the MoH came to be the 
main funding source for cooperation.  Soon after, ICTC was closed. 
South-South cooperation in health was gradually gaining a prominent place in official 
MoH documents (such as the “2004-2007 National Health Plan: a pact for health in Brazil” and 
the “More Health: Everyone’s Right 2008-2011” and their successive versions until 2015), in 
connection with the “internationalisation of the MoH”, the SUS good experiences (HIV/AIDS, 
cancer, control of smoking etc.), always explicitly interlinked with foreign policyxx. 
Beyond the issue of AIDS, Lula’s strategy of linking “poverty (as a cause of hunger) 
with development” also had its origins in the demands of civil society. After decades of political 
and economic discussions Lula’s government adopted the ‘Zero Hunger’ (‘Fome Zero’) 
programme as its guiding proposalxxi. ‘Poverty reduction’ had also been the World Bank 
‘mission’ since McNamara (1968-1981), with the objective to make the Bank a ‘development 
agency’72,73. In the 1990s, the World Bank became increasingly involved in health issues, 
exerting more and more influence in this area22,74. The issues of poverty and global health were 
already in the Bank's agenda. 
The issue was revisited at the Meeting of Heads of State on “Combating Hunger and 
Poverty”, held at the United Nations Headquarters in New York (UN) at the initiative of the 
Presidents of Brazil, France, Chile and Spain, in parallel with the UN General Assembly 
(September 20, 2004)xxii. The proposal was to “unite efforts around a common goal” and seek 
solutions to achieve it. 
A policy to combat hunger [...] presupposes the restoration of sustainable 
economic growth with rising employment and incomes [...and] also the 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4763
17 
 
reduction of the extreme asymmetries of the world economy in order to 
balance trade relations between nations and alleviate financial pressures on 
developing countries [....it is not enough] to make demands on the rich 
nations, [we must] also involve the poor countries [...] the developing 
countries must not stand aside, they must do their part (President Lula’s 
opening speech at the meeting, 2004, n/p). 
Prepared by the four countries, a technical report discussed innovative financing 
mechanisms “to launch a new stage in the fight against hunger and poverty, requiring 
multilateral negotiations and others that may be adopted voluntarily” (President Lula's speech 
at the meeting, 2004). The same rhetoric has been used at other world conferences and summits 
on development (e.g., the 2005 New York Declaration on Innovative Sources of Financing for 
Development). 
Nevertheless, Brazil was unable to establish Zero Hunger as an international policy:  
It proved very difficult to fulfil the president’s wishes in terms of combating 
hunger [...], which led to efforts shifting to the issue of access to medicines. 
[...] It was a very concrete health opportunity that would involve some 
countries and would also have an impact on the fight against hunger and 
poverty. [...] Efforts were then directed towards access to medicines and 
indirectly towards the fight against hunger and poverty [...] which even led to 
the creation of UNITAID. “[…] I think that from then on [2004] we have 
become more aware that health is of great importance. There were initiatives 
before, but they were rather sparse. (Itamaraty key actor interview). 
The creation of UNITAID in 2006 is an evolution of this process, as Jorge Bermudez, a 
Brazilian and former director of UNITAIDxxiii, explains:  
UNITAID is an innovative financial organisation that uses mechanisms based 
on market dynamics to expand access to treatment and diagnosis for 
HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, and malaria, where we seek to balance lowering 
drug prices while ensuring quality, faster availability, and scale of 
access75(n/p). 
In summary, the BF, the principles of SUS, control, the relationships between hunger, 
poverty, and structural considerations produced values and principles that were strongly 
coordinated and widely disseminated and internationalised in speeches by President Lula and 
the diplomatic corps, and in South-South health cooperation projects. 
Final remarks 
‘Brazilian health diplomacy’ can be better understood by considering Brazilian foreign 
policy as a public policy and by examining the role of social policy (including health policy) in 
the formation and implementation of foreign policy in a given period, as well as the role of 
politics in this discussion76. Crucial to this was the priority given to ‘social’ concerns on Brazil's 
international agenda, a process that stemmed from the demands of civil society movements. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4763
18 
 
The changes that took place in Brazil with the end of the military dictatorship and the 
restoration of democracy were reflected in all public policies, including foreign policy. The 
government began to work with a variety of traditional and nongovernmental actors and 
agendas in a number of different areas. Changes at the international level and globalisation, 
interacting with domestic affairs, led to discussions on a wide range of issues and to a 
diversification of Brazil’s international activities that provided space for broad political 
mobilisation and advocacy, despite structural inequalities and differences among countries in 
the world system. 
The health sector also had its antecedents. Since the 1960s, Brazil had been a leader in 
initiatives that were later taken up at the global level. These experiences were brought by 
Brazilian personnel to PAHO and later to WHO, and a number of primary health care ideas 
were considered in Brazil 12 years before Alma-Ata. The same is true for human resources, 
social determinants of health, and others. It can be said that ‘Collective Health’ (a concept 
coined in Brazil in the 1970s)77 have been born internationalised78. All the major health 
movements in Brazil and in the Latin American region (or at least the most important ones: 
social medicine, strategic planning of the health sector, and health care reform) had links with 
international institutions, actors, and ideas, and shared their efforts with them, especially since 
the 1950s. 
In Brazil, the need to establish SUS as a universal public system and to strengthen health 
services and activities as a public good and health as a fundamental component of development 
has been a common concern for decades among a large part of those working in the health 
sector, as well as the leading institutions in the field (Fiocruz, National Cancer Institute, 
Butantan Institute and others). Strengthening the health system was a central theme for 
Brazilian representatives at WHO. 
Brazilian actors were increasingly present in these discussions, which had developed 
slowly since the beginning of the political transition period (1985-1990) and intensified in the 
1990s. This was an important development in the process of restoring democracy in Brazilian 
society: social movements had grown – from sectoral (e.g., health care reform) and thematic 
(e.g., combating the HIV/AIDS epidemic) motivations – and demanded rights (social, human, 
voice and vote) and universal public policies in solidarity, adding quality to the struggle against 
dictatorship and political transition. This practice was reinforced by the entry of activist 
professionals into the state apparatus. In other words, one could say that Brazil was already 
practicing a kind of ‘health diplomacy’ before the term even existed. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4763
19 
 
However, it was not until the two Lula administrations that the issue of health really 
entered the foreign policy agenda and became an important factor in Brazil’s growing 
international presence and prestige. Brazilian health diplomacy, strengthened and stimulated 
during this period, gained a certain ‘autonomy’ as a field of activity of the health sector, made 
possible by the activism and commitment of a variety of state and non-state actors linked to 
social movements and the state apparatus. In the same period, the ‘internationalisation of 
Brazilian domestic politics’ drew on these domestic developments and was linked to the 
country's upward strategies in the international system, also establishing a link with South-
South cooperation, which put into a new context the historical discussions that influenced the 
Brazilian government's activities after the transition to democracy. 
South-South cooperation in health, an important foreign policy strategy, especially in 
the period from 2003 to 201079,80,49,24, leveraged and sustained Brazilian health diplomacy, 
which operated on a demand-driven approach (mainly form Africa and Latin America). In that 
period, Brazilian foreign policy adopted “a declared ethic of solidarity among developing 
countries”, with an explicit political dimension, “which provides a platform for co-operation 
among countries that want to strengthen their bilateral and multilateral coalitions in order to 
obtain bargaining power on the global agenda”49(7). 
Brazilian diplomatic activism in the health field – understood both as the actions of 
specific health policy circles in national and global sociopolitical environment81 and as the 
activity of diplomats in specific periods and on specific issues – operated on at least two lines: 
one focused on national and transnational advocacy, the other on the coordinated activities of 
Brazilian diplomats and representatives of other agencies in international arenas, in 
collaboration with civil society and state apparatus activists. The intersection of internal and 
external variables in the formulation and implementation of these policies is crucial to this 
dynamic. A similar internal-external interrelation can be seen at other times, as in the leading 
role Brazil had played since the 1980s in preparation of the Framework Convention on Tobacco 
Control14, 82,83, combining the expertise of Brazil’s tobacco use control policy (an initiative of 
the National Institute of Cancer) with the competent actions of Brazilian diplomacy in 
international arenas. 
Despite the importance of these developments, they do not mean that the various actors 
have the same weight domestically and internationally, nor do they mean that social activism 
is directly reflected in the foreign policy of a particular country, although it may have 
contributed to the formulation and implementation of a successful, temporary domestic policy 
and carried its own struggles to the international level. Nor does the internationalisation of 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4763
20 
 
values and principles express itself a priori as an imitation of the politics of others or as a 
reproduction of processes triggered by a specific national context. 
Although social advocacy is extremely important, its effectiveness depends on the 
reciprocation of other, equally important actors and on institutionalised, national and 
international public policies. The latter, in turn, can be de-structured or even destroyed 
depending on the political coalitions that sustain them, because ‘institutions tend to be process-
oriented’, that is, as analysed by Jönsson & Hall (2005), cited by Almeida81, they depend on 
formal and informal rules that prescribe behaviour, constraints, and activities and shape 
expectations; consequently, they change with different contexts and conjunctures. For a fact, 
institutional arrangements changed and adapted to the relationships between actors through 
different contexts and conjunctions, in a process that was constantly prone to conflicts, twists 
and turns. 
From this point of view, even constant advocacy is not enough to bring about change in 
national and international politics. However, it is essential in keeping alive the struggle for 
human rights and solidarity among peoples. Therefore, the importance of more systematic and 
rigorous studies on the possibilities and limits of the links between health and international 
relations is emphasised. 
______________________ 
AUTHORS CONTRIBUTION 
Celia Almeida [http://orcid.org/0000-0002-1758-1142] performed the research and conceived 
and wrote the paper;  
Thaisa Santos Lima [http://orcid.org/0000-0001-8276-4124] supported the data collection, 
drafting and final review; and  
Rodrigo Pires de Campos [http://orcid.org/0000-0001-7480-4050] took part in discussing, 
drafting and final review of the paper. 
 
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: We declare no conflict of interests. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This paper forms part of the project “Global Health Diplomacy: An explanatory multi-case 
study of the integration of health into foreign policy – Canada, Brazil, México and Chile”, 
coordinated by Ronald Labonté, University of Ottawa, Canada. This is an analysis of the 
“Brazilian Case”. We thank Ronald Labonté and Arne Rückert for the discussions and ideas 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4763
21 
 
shared; and also the Brazilian Case Study research assistants – Alexandre Alvarenga, André 
Saboya, Carolina Fontes dos Santos and Rosiane Martins dos Santos – who supported the 
research field work at different times. Obviously, all analyses and eventual mistakes are the 
authors’ sole responsibility. 
___________________________ 
REFERENCES  
1. Draibe, S. Policy Analysis in Brazil: Emergence and Institutionalisation. Brazilian Political 
Science Review, 2014 [Accessed on: 05 April 2020]; 8(2):118-122. Available at: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/1981-38212014000100014. 
2. Espiridião, MA. Análise política em saúde: síntese das abordagens teórico-metodológicas. 
Saúde em Debate, 2018; 42(Número Especial 2):341-360. DOI: 10.1590/0103-
11042018S22. 
3. Berlan, D, Buse, K, Shiffman, J. The bit in the middle: a synthesis of global health 
literature on policy formulation and adoption. Health Policy Plan. 2014 [Acessed in: 12 
July 2021]; 29(Issue suppl 3):23-34:iii23–iii34. Available at: 
https://doi.org/10.1093/heapol/czu060 
4. Jones, CM, Clavier, W. & Potvin. L. Adapting public policy theory for public health 
research: A framework to understand the development of national policies on global 
health. Social Science and Medicine, 2017; 177:69-77. 
5. Milner, H. Interest, Institutions and Information: Domestic Politics and International 
Relations. Princenton: Princeton University, 1997. 
6. Lima, MRS. Foreign Policy and Democracy: A Preliminary Analysis of the Brazilian Case. 
Paper presented at the annual convention of the International Sociological Association, 
New Orleans, 24 to 27 March, 2002 [Accessed on: 20 September 2012]. Available at: 
http://www.isanet.org/noarchive/lima.html 
7. Ratón-Sanchez, M.; Silva, E.C.G.; Cardoso, E.L & Spécie, P. Política externa como 
política pública: uma análise pela regulamentação constitucional brasileira (1967-1988). 
Rev. Sociol. Polít., 2006 [Accessed on: 05 January 2008]; 27:125-143. Available at: 
https://www.scielo.br/j/rsocp/a/gKCfZnzSZC7kjhJndL8YSmJ/?format=pdf&lang=pt. 
8. Lima, Mrs. A agência da política externa brasileira: uma análise preliminar. In: Walter 
Antonio Desiderá Neto, Sergio Abreu & Lima Florencio; Haroldo Ramanzini Junior; 
Edison Benedito da Silva Filho (org.), Política Externa Brasileira: dimensões e estratégias 
de inserção internacional no pós-2008. Brasília: Funag/IPEA, 2018 (pp. 39-53). 
9. Nery, T. Política Externa Brasileira, Modelo de Desenvolvimento e Coalizões Políticas 
(1930-2016). Cadernos do CEAS, 2017; (241):418-444. 
10. Milani, C. & Pinheiro, L. The Politics of Brazilian Foreign Policy and its Analytical 
Challenges. Foreign Policy Analysis, 2017; 13:278–296. DOI: 10.1093/fpa/orw027. 
11. Fidler, D. P., Health as Foreign Policy: Between Principle and Power. The Whitehead 
Journal of Diplomacy and International Relations, 2005 [Accessed on: 03 March 2011]; 
6(179). Available at: https://www.repository.law.indiana.edu/facpub/525.  
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4763
22 
 
12. Fidler, D.P. Health in foreign policy: An analytical overview. Canadian Foreign Policy 
Journal, 2011 [Acessed on: 05 maio 2012]; 15(3):11-29. Available at: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/11926422.2009.9673489 
13. Fidler, D. P. Health diplomacy. In: A. F. Cooper, J. Heine, & R. Thakur (Eds.), The 
Oxford handbook of modern diplomacy, 2013, EUA, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
14. Lee, K, Chagas, Lc, Novotny, TE. Brazil and the framework convention on tobacco 
control: global health diplomacy as soft power. PLoS Med, 2010; 7(4):e1000232. 
15. Feldbaum, H., & Michaud, J. Health diplomacy and the enduring relevance of foreign. 
policy interests. PLoS Medicine, 2010; 7(4), e1000226. 
16. Lee, K., & Smith, R. (2011). What is a “global health diplomacy”? A conceptual review. 
Global Health Governance, 2011 [Accessed on: 23 February 2022]; 5(1). Available at: 
https://blogs.shu.edu/ghg/files/2011/11/Lee-and-Smith_What-is-Global-Health-
Diplomacy_Fall-2011.pdf 
17. Faria, CAP. Itamaraty e a Política Externa Brasileira: do insulamento à coordenação dos 
atores governamentais e de cooperação com agentes societários. Contexto Internacional, 
2012 [Accessed on: 10 April 2021]; 34(1):311-355. Available at: 
https://www.scielo.br/j/cint/a/bcWcqfYFWhDWwxYDbqQsdbj/abstract/?lang=pt 
18. Lima MRS & Hisrt M. Brasil como poder intermediário e poder regional. In Hurrell A, et 
al. (eds.), Os BRICS e a Ordem Global. Rio de Janeiro: FGV, 2009, pp. 43–73. 
19. Vigevani, T & Oliveira, MF. A política externa brasileira na era FHC: um exercício de 
autonomia pela integração. Tempo Social, 2003 (2004) [Accessed on: 02 April 2010]; 
15(2):31-61. 
20. Abranches, S. Presidencialismo de coalizão: o dilema institucional brasileiro. Dados - 
Revista de Ciências Sociais, 1988, 31(1):5–14. 
21. Abranches, S. Presidencialismo de coalizão: raízes e evolução do modelo político 
brasileiro. São Paulo: Companhia das Letras, 2018. 
22. Brown, T; Cueto, M. and Fee, E. A transição de saúde pública ‘internacional’ para 
‘global’ e a Organização Mundial da Saúde. História, Ciência, Saúde – Manguinhos, 2006; 
13(3):623-647. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1590/S0104-59702006000300005. 
23. Cueto, M & Lopes, G. Aids, Antirretrovirals, Brazil and International Politics of Global 
Health. Social History of Medicine, 2020; 34(Issue 1), pp. 1–22. DOI: doi-
org.eres.qnl.qa/10.1093/shm/hkz044. 
24. Milani, C; Pinheiro, L. & Lima, MRS. Brazil’s foreign policy and the ‘graduation 
dilemma’. International Affairs, 2017; 93(3):585–605. DOI: 10.1093/ia/iix078  
25. Milani, C. & Nery, T. The sketch of Brazil’s grand strategy under the Workers’ Party 
(2003–2016): Domestic and international constraints, South African Journal of 
International Affairs, 2019 [Accessed on: 26 November 2020]. Available at: 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10220461.2019.1584583. 
26. Farias, H.C. & Alves, P.C. The decline in Brazil’s international influence: from an 
emerging country to an inward-looking state. Austral: Brazilian Journal of Strategy & 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4763
23 
 
International Relations, 2020 [Accessed on: 06 June 2021]; 9(17):14-37. Available at: 
https://seer.ufrgs.br/austral/article/viewFile/100702/57551 
27. Miranda. S.M. A Nova Política Externa Brasileira: de Temer para a América do Sul. Rev. 
Conjuntura Austral, 2019; 10(51):126-138. 
28. Maringoni G.; Schutte, G. R.; Berron, G. (Orgs.). 2003-2013: uma nova política externa. 
Tubarão: Ed. Copiart, 2014. 
29. Pinheiro. L. & Lima, MRS. Between Autonomy and Dependency: The Place of Agency in 
Brazilian Foreign Policy. Brazilian Political Science Review, 2018, 12(3):e0003 - 1/22. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/1981-3821201800030003 . 
30. Rubarth, E. O. A diplomacia e as questões sociais: o caso da saúde. Brasília: Instituto Rio 
Branco. Fundação Alexandre de Gusmão. Centro de Altos Estudos Estratégicos, 1999 
[Accessed on: 02 March 2022]. Available at: 
http://www.dominiopublico.gov.br/download/texto/al000203.pdf 
31. Mota, R. dos S. O combate à fome e à pobreza na política externa brasileira (2003-2010): 
do discurso à prática e a prática do discurso. Masters dissertation, Brasília University, 
Postgraduate Programme in International Relations, 2015 [Accessed on: 26 September 
2021]. Available at: 
https://repositorio.unb.br/bitstream/10482/17903/1/2015_RodrigodosSantosMota.pdf 
32. Paim. J.; Travassos, C.; Almeida, C; Bahia, L. E Macinko, J. The Brazilian health system: 
history, advances, and challenges. The Lancet, 2011, 377(9779):1778-1797. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(11)60054-8. 
33. Souza, LEPF; Paim, J; Teixeira, CF et al. Os desafios atuais da luta pelo direito universal 
à saúde no Brasil. Ciência & Saúde Coletiva, 2019; 24(8):2783-2792. DOI: 10.1590/1413-
81232018248.3446 
34. Parker, R.G. Civil Society, Political Mobilization, and the Impact of HIV Scaleup on 
Health Systems in Brazil. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr, 2009; 52(Suppl 1): S49–S51. 
Doi:10.1097/QAI.0b013e3181bbcb56.2009 
35. Parker, R.G. Grassroots Activism, Civil Society Mobilization, and the Politics of the 
Global HIV/ AIDS Epidemic. Brown Journal of World Affairs, 2011, xvii(issue ii):21-37. 
36. Parker, R.G. Entrevista-Estigmas do HIV/aids: novas identidades e tratamentos em 
permanentes sistemas de exclusão. Reciis – Rev Eletron Comun Inf Inov Saúde, 
2019;13(3):618-33. http://dx.doi.org/10.29397/reciis.v13i3.1922. 
37. Parker, R.G. Brazil and the AIDS Crisis. Oxford Research Encyclopedia, Latin American 
History, Online Publication, 2020. DOI: 10.1093/acrefore/9780199366439.013.865 
38. Barros, S.G. de and Vieira-De-Souza, L. The genesis of the AIDS policy and AIDS Space 
in Brazil (1981-1989). Revista de Saúde Pública, 2016; 50(43):1-12. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/s1518-8787.2016050005801. 
39. Vigevani, T & Cepaluni, GA. Política Externa de Lula da Silva: A Estratégia da 
Autonomia pela Diversificação. Revista Contexto Internacional, 2007 [Accessed on: 02 
March 2021]; 29(2):273-335, 2007. Available at: http://contextointernacional.iri.puc-
rio.br/media/Vigevani_vol29n2.pdf 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4763
24 
 
40. Barboza, TMT; Pinheiro, L and Pires-Alves, F. O diálogo entre saúde e política externa 
brasileira nos governos de Fernando Henrique Cardoso (1995-2002) e Luiz Inácio Lula da 
Silva (2003-2010). Rev. Carta Inter., 2017; 12(3):175-198. 
41. Saraiva, MG. Continuidade e mudança na política externa brasileira. As especificidades 
do comportamento externo brasileiro de 2003 a 2010. Relações Internacionais, 2013 
[Acessed in: 20 Sept 2020]; (37):63-78. Available at: 
https://ipri.unl.pt/images/publicacoes/revista_ri/pdf/ri37/n37a06.pdf  
42. Silva, ALR. Geometria variável e parcerias estratégicas: a diplomacia multidimensional 
do governo Lula (2003-2010). Contexto Int., 2015; 37(1):143-184. Available at: 
https://doi.org/10.1590/S0102-8529201500010000. 
43. Oliveira, M.F. Multilateralismo, Democracia e Política Externa no Brasil: Contenciosos 
das Patentes e do Algodão na Organização Mundial do Comércio (OMC). Contexto 
Internacional, 2007; 29(1):7-38. 
44. Fagnani, E. A política social do governo Lula (2003-2010): perspectiva histórica. SER 
Social, 2011 [Accessed on: 03 April 2012]; 13(28):41-80. Available at: 
https://periodicos.unb.br/index.php/SER_Social/article/view/12682 
45. Boito, A; Berringer, T. Social classes, neodevelopmentalism, and Brazilian foreign policy 
under presidents Lula and Dilma. Latin American Perspectives, 2014; 41(5):94-109. 
46. Pochman, M. Políticas sociais e padrão de mudanças no Brasil durante o governo Lula. 
Ser Social, Jan/Jul 2011; 13(28):12-40. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.26512/ser_social.v13i28.12681. 
47. Kerstenetzky, 2012. Políticas Sociais: focalização ou universalização? Revista de 
Economia Política, 2006 [Accessed on: 15 August 2008]; 26(4):564-574. Available at: 
https://www.scielo.br/j/rep/a/4qDF8Yvm33v8bMPLHrbBK7P/?format=pdf&lang=pt 
48. Garcia, AS & Kato, KYM. A história da caça ou do caçador? Reflexões sobre a inserção 
do Brasil na África. Tensões Mundiais, 2014 [Accessed on: 07 March 2016]; 10(18):145-
171. Available at: 
https://revistas.uece.br/index.php/tensoesmundiais/article/download/476/373/1517  
49. Milani, C. Brazil’s South-South Co-operation Strategies: From Foreign Policy to Public 
Policy. Occasional Paper 179, Global Powers and Africa Program, Johannesburg, South 
Africa: South African Institute of International Affairs, 2014. 
50. Puente, C. A. I. A cooperação técnica horizontal brasileira como instrumento da política 
externa: a evolução da cooperação técnica com países em desenvolvimento – CTPD – no 
período 1995-2005. Brasília: FUNAG, 2010 [Accessed on: 02 March 2022]. Available at: 
http://funag.gov.br/loja/download/715-
Cooperacao_Tecnica_Horizontal_Brasileira_como_Instrumento_da_PolItica_Externa_A.p
df 
51. Pinheiro, L. & Milani, C. (org.). Política externa brasileira: as práticas da política e a 
política das práticas. Rio de Janeiro: Editora FGV, 2012 (352 p.) 
52. Draibe, S. A política social no período FHC e o sistema de proteção social. Tempo Soc. 
2003 [Accessed on: 06 Jul 2020]; 15(2):64-101. Available at: 
https://doi.org/10.1590/S0103-20702003000200004. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4763
25 
 
53. Marques, R.M.; Ximenes, C.B. & Ugino, C.K. Governos Lula e Dilma em matéria de 
seguridade social e acesso à educação superior. Revista de Economia Política, 2018 
[Accessed on: 15 September 2020]; 38(3-152):526-547. Available at: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/0101-35172018-2784  
54. Skocpol, T. Targeting within Universalism: politically viable policies to combat poverty 
in the United States. In: Jencks, Christopher & Peterson, Paul E. (eds.). The urban 
underclass, Washington, The Brookings Institution, 1991, pp. 411-36. 
55. Almeida, C. Parcerias público-privadas (PPP) no setor saúde: processos globais e 
dinâmicas nacionais. Cad. Saúde Pública, 2017 [Accessed on: 2 February 2020]; 33(Suppl 
2):[2:e00197316] Doi.org/10.1590/0102-311X00197316. Available at: 
http://cadernos.ensp.fiocruz.br/static/arquivo/1678-4464-csp-33-s2-e00197316.pdf  
56. Amorim, C. A grande estratégia do Brasil: discursos, artigos e entrevistas da gestão no 
Ministério da Defesa (2011-2014) / Celso Amorim; Antonio Jorge Ramalho da Rocha ... 
[et al.] (editors). - Brasília: FUNAG; [São Paulo]: Unesp, 2016. 
57. Almeida, C; Braveman, P; Gold, MR et al. Methodological concerns and 
recommendations on policy consequences of the World Health Report 2000. The Lancet, 
2001; 357(9269):1692-7. Doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(00)04825-x.  
58. Ugá, A.; Almeida, C.; Szwarcwald, C.; et al. Consideraciones Sobre el Informe de la 
OMS – 2000. Revista de Salud Pública, 2001; 1(3):1-12. 
59. Oliveira, MA; Bermudez, JZ; Chaves, GCc & Velasquez, G. Has the implementation of 
the TRIPS Agreement in Latin America and the Caribbean produced in intellectual 
property legislation that favours public health? Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 
2004; 82(11):815-821. 
60. Flynn, M. Brazilian pharmaceutical diplomacy: social democratic principles versus soft 
power interests. International Journal of Health Services, 2013; 43(1):67–89. Available at: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2190/HS.43.1.f  
61. Santos Lima, TGFM. Cooperação internacional do Brasil em HIV/Aids: 
institucionalização e especificidades nos contextos nacional e internacional. PhD Thesis – 
Escola Nacional de Saúde Pública Sergio Arouca/Fiocruz, Rio de Janeiro, 2017 [Accessed 
on: 02 March 2022]. Available at: https://www.arca.fiocruz.br/handle/icict/31151 
62. Cervo, AL. Socializando o desenvolvimento: uma história da Cooperação Técnica 
Internacional do Brasil. RBPI – Revista Brasileira de Política Internacional, 1994 
[Accessed on: 02 March 2022]; 1:37-63. Available at: 
https://www.academia.edu/4778231/Socializando_o_desenvolvimento_uma_história_da_c
ooperação_técnica_internacional_do_Brasil  
63. Abia-Associação Brasileira Interdisciplinar De Aids. XII International – AIDS 
Conference – South Africa, 9-14 July, 2000. Boletim ABIA 45, 2000 [Accessed in: 20 
August, 2020]. Available at: http://abiaids.org.br/_img/media/boletim45.pdf. 
64. Berkman, A.; Garcia, J.; Muñoz-Labov, M.; Paiva, V. and Parker, R. A Critical Analysis 
of the Brazilian Response to HIV/AIDS: Lessons Learned for Controlling and Mitigating 
the Epidemic in Developing Countries. American Journal of Public Health, 2005; 
95(7):1162-1172; DOI: 10.2105/AJPH.2004.054593 . 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4763
26 
 
65. Chaves, GC. Interfaces entre a produção local e o acesso a medicamentos no contexto do 
Acordo TRIPS da Organização Mundial do Comércio. Tese (Doutorado) – Escola 
Nacional de Saúde Pública Sergio Arouca/Fiocruz, Rio de Janeiro, 2016 [Accessed on: 02 
March 2022]. Available at: https://www.arca.fiocruz.br/handle/icict/20934 
66. Marques, RM. Permanência e ruptura na proteção social brasileira no período recente. 
Argumentum, 2019; 11(1):130-145. DOI: http://10.18315/argumentum.v11i1.23131 . 
67. Singer, A. Raízes sociais e ideológicas do lulismo. Novos Estudos Cebrap, 2009 
[Accessed on: 30 October 2010]; 85. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/S0101-
33002009000300004 
68. Marques, RM & Mendes, A. O Social no Governo Lula: a construção de um novo 
populismo em tempos de aplicação de uma agenda neoliberal. Revista de Economia 
Política, 2006 [Accessed on: 09 October 2020]; 26(1-101):58-74. Available at: 
https://www.scielo.br/j/rep/a/f4cK8XCb9sK7b5RjPLQ6zdy/?format=pdf&lang=pt 
69. Economic Commission for Latin America and Caribbean-ECLAC. Social Panorama of 
Latin America 2009. 2010 [Accessed on: 06 Jul 2018]. Available at: 
https://www.cepal.org/en/publications/1249-social-panorama-latin-america-2009 
70. Afonso JR., R. Descentralização fiscal, políticas sociais, e transferência de renda no 
Brasil. Instituto Latinoamericano y del Caribe de Planificación Económica y Social-
ILPES-Cepal/GTZ, 2007 [Accessed on: 27 August 2021]. Available at: https://repositorio. 
.org/bitstream/handle/11362/7319/1/S2007604_pt.pdf. 
71. Couto, CG. Hacia el centro: el PT y el gobierno de Lula en Brasil. Revista Temas y 
Debates, 2010; 14(20): pp. 125-139. Issn 1666 071. 
72. Pereira, J.M.M. O Banco Mundial e a construção político-intelectual do combate à 
pobreza. Topoi, 2010a, 11(21):260-282. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/2237-
101X011021014  
73. Pereira, João Márcio Mendes. O Banco Mundial como ator político, intelectual e 
financeiro (1944-2008). Rio de Janeiro: Civilização Brasileira, 2010b. 
74. Almeida C. O Banco Mundial e as reformas contemporâneas do setor saúde [Accessed on: 
02 February 2020]. In: Pereira JMM & Pronko, M. (organizadores), A demolição de 
direitos: um exame das políticas do Banco Mundial para a educação e a saúde (1980-
2013). Rio de Janeiro: Escola Politécnica de Saúde Joaquim Venâncio; 2015, p. 183-232. 
Available at: http://www.epsjv.fiocruz.br/index.php?Area=Material&Tipo=8&Num=240. 
75. Centro Colaborador em Vigilância Sanitária- CECOVISA. Unitaid: uma junção de 
esforços para controlar o HIV/Aids, a Tuberculose e a Malária – Entrevistando Jorge 
Bermudez, 2012 [Accessed on: 03 March 2020]; Rio de Janeiro: Ensp/Fiocruz. Available 
at: http://www6.ensp.fiocruz.br/visa/?q=node/2084 
76. Fazal, TM. Health Diplomacy in Pandemical Times. International Organization, 
December 2020 [Accessed on: 08 March 2022];74(Supplement):E78–E97. 
Doi:10.1017/S0020818320000326. Available at: https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms 
77. Pêgo, R.A. & Almeida, C. Teoría y práctica de las reformas en los sistemas de salud: los 
casos de Brasil y México. Cad. Saúde Pública, Rio de Janeiro, jul-ago, 2002; 18(4):971-
989. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1590/S0102-311X2002000400006 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4763
27 
 
78. Loyola, M.A. O lugar das ciências sociais na saúde coletiva. Saúde e Sociedade, 2012 
[Accessed on: 05 July 2013]; 21(1). Available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/S0104-
12902012000100002 
79. Buss, P. M.; Ferreira, J. R. Diplomacia da saúde, cooperação sul-sul: as experiências da 
UNASUL saúde e do Plano Estratégico de Cooperação em Saúde da Comunidade de 
Países de Língua Portuguesa (CPLP). RECISS – R. Eletr. de Com. Inf. Inov. Saúde, 2010 
[Accessed on: 02 March 2012.]; Rio de Janeiro, 4(1):pp. 106-118. Available at: 
https://www.reciis.icict.fiocruz.br/index.php/reciis/article/view/712  
80. Carillo-Roa, AC and Santana, JP. Regional integration and South-South cooperation in 
health in Latin America and the Caribbean. Rev. Panam. Salud Publica, 2012 [Accessed 
on: 18 May 2013]; 32(5):368-375. Available at: 
https://www.scielosp.org/pdf/rpsp/2012.v32n5/368-375. 
81. Almeida, C. Global Health Diplomacy: A Theoretical and Analytical Review. Oxford 
Research Encyclopedia, Public Health Policy and Governance [Online Publication]; Feb 
2020. USA: Oxford University Press USA. DOI:10.1093/acrefore/9780190632366.013.25. 
82. Porte, LH; Machado, CV; Turci, SRB; Figueiredo, VC; Cavalcante, TM & Silva, VLC. 
Tobacco Control Policies in Brazil: a 30-year assessment. Ciência & Saúde Coletiva, 2018; 
23(6):1837-1848. DOI: 10.1590/1413-81232018236.05202018. 
83. Araujo Neto, LA; Teixeira, LA; Turci, SRB and Figueiredo, VC (organizadores). Luta 
contra o Tabaco no Brasil – 40 anos de história. Rio de Janeiro: Outras Letras, 2022 (252 
NOTES 
() This paper is part of the project “Global Health Diplomacy: An explanatory multi-case study of the 
integration of health into foreign policy – Canada, Brazil, México and Chile”, coordinated by Ronald 
Labonté, University of Ottawa, Canada, and supported by Canadian Institutes of Health Research [grant 
number 136927] and by the National School of Public Health, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil. This is the analysis of the Brazilian Case. 
 
i In the case of Brazil, for example, the establishment of the Unified National Health System (Sistema 
Único de Saúde, SUS) and the country’s role in intellectual property rights and access to medicines 
against HIV/AIDS. 
ii According to Lima8(41), ‘the goals of prestige diplomacy include demonstrating or claiming power and 
performance [...] in order to impress other nations [...] seeking a strong multilateral presence as an 
instrument of soft power instead of hard power, which they do not exercise.”  
iii ‘Itamaraty’ refers to The Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Historically it functioned as a highly specialised 
professional organisation – the diplomatic corps. 
iv Brazil has been involved in international disputes and discussions since the first decades of the 20th 
century, participating in the major conferences after 1945, as well as in the creation of the United Nations 
Organisation (UN) (as a founding member), and other organisations and agreements regulating 
international trade - the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and the World Trade 
Organisation (WTO). The World Health Organisation (WHO), established in 1945 as an international 
agency for health (within UN), was proposed by a public health Brazilian specialist, Dr. Geraldo de 
Paula Souza (1889-1951), and a Chinese delegate and diplomat Szeming Sze (1908-1998)22,23. 
v Distinct perceptions on the role of BFP in Brazil’s development emerged more clearly among Brazilian 
diplomats from the mid-1990s onwards. Two groups are identified: one, the ‘institutionalists’, favoured 
                                                           
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4763
28 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                     
a process of conditional economic liberalisation, supporting the international regimes and dominant 
positions in the international arena, and the other, the ‘autonomists’, advocated ‘neo-development”, 
integration and the political and strategic nature of the North-South debate, prioritising coalitions with 
countries of the ‘geopolitical South41. 
vi FHC, a sociologist, belonged to the academic and intellectual elite of São Paulo and enjoyed no little 
national and international prestige. It was no coincidence that his government was composed of a large 
number of technical and political collaborators of similar background. 
vii Ministers and the President took experts from other branches of government and representatives of 
the business community with them on these trips. 
viii The Instituto Rio Branco is an institution of the Itamaraty responsible for the training of diplomats in 
Brazil at postgraduate level and for their career planning. 
ix MINUSTHA (United Nations Stabilisation Mission in Haiti) was led by Brazil following the UN 
Security Council's decision in 2004. 
x This critique claimed that Brazil lacked the necessary hard (military) power instruments to ensure its 
dominance in regional security. 
xi An example was the passage of laws creating ‘Civil Society Organisations’ in 1998 and ‘Civil Society 
Organisations of Public Interest’ in 1999. These spread nationwide to provide health and other public 
interest services at different levels, but with highly problematic results55. 
xii Celso Amorim's mastery of these negotiations in international bodies was fundamental. He held 
prominent positions in international forums, groups, and commissions, including the GATT negotiating 
rounds (chief negotiator from 1991 to 1993) and then the WTO (Doha Round negotiations and others)56. 
xiii The flexibilities of TRIPS (exemption from parallel imports and protection from compulsory 
licencing) were discussed at this conference and included, among others, in the Doha Declaration, which 
was eventually adopted. 
xiv From the 1980s to 1998, there was considerable turnover in the Ministry of Health: in the second half 
of the 1980s, Brazil had four ministers of health. The instability of the department continued in the 
following period: there were four ministers from 1990 to 1994 and three from 1995 to 1998. 
xv José Serra, the first economist to become Minister of Health in Brazil, is a member of the PSDB and 
has held several positions in both the executive and legislative branches. In the first FHC government, 
he was Minister of Planning. He was originally slated for the Ministry of Finance (now the Ministry of 
Economy) but was not chosen. because he disagreed with some of the government’s economic policies. 
He then took over the Ministry of Planning, where his positions were also controversial. Finally, under 
certain conditions, he moved to the MoH, where he remained throughout the second FHC government. 
In 2002, he left the ministry to run for President of the Republic. He was not elected and lost to Lula. 
xvi This report was drafted by the WHO, during the Brundtland administration, under Julio Frenk’s 
coordination. Brazil’s National School of Public Health, from the Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (Fudação 
Oswaldo Cruz, Fiocruz), prepared a methodological critique of the report and called an international 
meeting of experts from the North and South, which resulted in the publication of critical articles57,58. 
That report was forwarded to the minister of health, José Serra, who led the argument against WHO 
2000 at the 2001 World Health Assembly. The manner in which the assessment was conducted, the 
problematical methodology and the ideological bias in the findings were inadmissible. Various countries 
criticised the ranking of health systems included in the report, complaining that they had not even been 
consulted about the findings. A special commission proposed by the WHA reassessed the publication 
and reaffirmed the criticisms of the ranking and its methodology. 
xvii One good example is the ‘Citizens Action against Hunger Extreme Poverty and for Life’ (Ação da 
Cidadania contra a Fome, a Miséria e pela Vida), a programme of the NGO Ação da Cidadania, set up 
by Herbert Daniel de Souza, o Betinho, which had enormous effects across Brazil. 
xviii The minimum wage was increased by 54% in real terms between December 2002 and December 
201053. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4763
29 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                     
xix These new loans came from the United Kingdom (DFID), Germany (GTZ) and the United States 
(CDC and Usaid), which began to triangulate cooperation with the PCI. 
xx The Thematic Group for International Cooperation in Health was established in 2010 at the Ministry 
of Health. In its meetings, different stakeholders shared their experiences to serve as a basis for the 
development of guidelines. This group met regularly for some time.  
xxi Since the 1950s, the fight against poverty in the world has been one of the dimensions of the 
development debate. A number of different economic models and models of international development 
cooperation have been formulated and implemented on the assumption that it could be overcome. 
xxii The presidents who convened the meeting were: Lula (Brazil), Jacques Chirac (France), Ricardo 
Lagos (Chile) and José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero (Spain). It was also supported by UN Secretary General 
Kofi Annan. 
xxiii UNITAID was launched in September 2006 during the United Nations General Assembly in New 
York and is supported by Chile, France, Brazil, Norway and the United Kingdom. It works in partnership 
with various actors - governments, public-private partnerships, and multilateral, nongovernmental, and 
civil society organisations (including private foundations such as the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation 
(BMGF)). It is funded from innovative sources, such as surcharges on airline tickets, which are decided 
jointly with the agency responsible for health care in each country (Interview with Jorge Bermudez75). 
Jorge Bermudez is a Brazilian Fiocruz employee, was director of the National School of Public Health 
(Ensp/Fiocruz), and worked in the pharmaceutical department of PAHO-WHO in Washington and in 
WHO in Geneva. From 2007 to 2011, he directed Unitaid. 
SciELO Preprints - This document is a preprint and its current status is available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/SciELOPreprints.4763
This preprint was submitted under the following conditions: 
The authors declare that they are aware that they are solely responsible for the content of the preprint and
that the deposit in SciELO Preprints does not mean any commitment on the part of SciELO, except its
preservation and dissemination.
The authors declare that the necessary Terms of Free and Informed Consent of participants or patients in
the research were obtained and are described in the manuscript, when applicable.
The authors declare that the preparation of the manuscript followed the ethical norms of scientific
communication.
The authors declare that the data, applications, and other content underlying the manuscript are
referenced.
The deposited manuscript is in PDF format.
The authors declare that the research that originated the manuscript followed good ethical practices and
that the necessary approvals from research ethics committees, when applicable, are described in the
manuscript.
The authors declare that once a manuscript is posted on the SciELO Preprints server, it can only be taken
down on request to the SciELO Preprints server Editorial Secretariat, who will post a retraction notice in its
place.
The authors agree that the approved manuscript will be made available under a Creative Commons CC-BY
license.
The submitting author declares that the contributions of all authors and conflict of interest statement are
included explicitly and in specific sections of the manuscript.
The authors declare that the manuscript was not deposited and/or previously made available on another
preprint server or published by a journal.
If the manuscript is being reviewed or being prepared for publishing but not yet published by a journal, the
authors declare that they have received authorization from the journal to make this deposit.
The submitting author declares that all authors of the manuscript agree with the submission to SciELO
Preprints.
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
