Objective: To assess the impact and correlation of socioeconomic vulnerability on COVID-19 outcomes and social distancing in Brazil.
Methods: The Gini Coefficient (GC), the Social Vulnerability Index (SVI), epidemiological data on COVID-19 epidemic in Brazil, and the Social Distancing Index (SDI) were retrieved from online databases and assessed for each Brazilian state. Data was statistically analyzed through non-parametric tests and multiple linear regressions.
Results: The mean values for the GC and SVI were 0.495 and 0.261, respectively. A positive statistically significant correlation between the socioeconomic indicators and the three variables related to the COVID-19 outbreak was found. States with very low social vulnerability presented fewer deaths per 100 thousand inhabitants due to COVID-19 than states with moderate social vulnerability. SVI was a predictor of accumulated cases, confirmed deaths, and social distancing in Brazilian states during COVID-19.
Conclusions: The COVID-19 outcomes and SDI in Brazilian states are correlated to the socioeconomic condition. The pandemic impacts are more severe in less favored communities.
Less than four months after the first confirmed case of the 2019 novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in Brazil, the country reaches the mark of more than one million accumulated cases, and over 50.000 confirmed deaths ¹. These numbers are estimated to be even greater, considering the likely occurrence of underreporting as the country is testing only severe cases ². During the pandemic, the country has been facing a political crisis, which has been misleading the efforts to mitigate COVID-19 spread and its socioeconomic impacts ³.
Brazil is the largest and most populous Latin-American country; its continental dimension favors to diversity in socioeconomic and geographical aspects 4. Each Brazilian region is different, based on social behavior, genetics, and economic backgrounds raising the need for different measures and health policies to direct medical resources, and to manage social issues, respecting each area’s particularities ².
All regions in Brazil have confirmed cases of COVID-19 ¹. There is a socioeconomic disparity among regions corroborating several issues related with COVID-19 pandemic such as access and understanding of information about the disease, availability of diagnostic tests, health human resources, and intensive care units, besides the political decisions to control the pandemic 2,3.
Despite statements like “COVID-19 virus does not discriminate”, made by some politicians and part of the media, COVID-19 is not a socially neutral disease 5. Special attention must be paid to vulnerable populations, since recent reports indicate that incidence and deaths are disproportionately affecting less favored communities 6,7,8. Scientific evidence and broader surveillance are in urgent need to improve response and planning, such as resources allocation, to tackle health inequities in the current COVID- 19 pandemic 9. Thus, the present study aims to assess the impact and correlation of socioeconomic vulnerability on COVID-19 outcomes and social distancing in Brazil.
The Gini Coefficient (GC) and the Social Vulnerability Index (SVI) were adopted as socioeconomic indicators. The values scored in these indicators for each Brazilian state were retrieved from the online database of the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics 10 and the Institute of Applied Economic Research 11, respectively. In addition to socioeconomic indicators epidemiological data on COVID-19 epidemic in Brazil and the Social Distancing Index (SDI) were assessed for each Brazilian state.
The GC is a measure of statistical dispersion used in economics intended to represent the income or wealth distribution among residents of a certain area and is the most used measurement of inequality. This indicator has been applied in the health field to measure disparities. The GC value ranges from 0 (perfect equality, where every household earns the same income) to 1.0 (perfect inequality, where households earn a diverse range of incomes) 12.
The SVI is an index that seeks to highlight different indicatives of exclusion and social vulnerability in a perspective that goes further the comprehension of poverty only as insufficient monetary resources. Thus, the SVI intends to signal the access, absence, or insufficiency of some “assets” in areas of the Brazilian territory, which should be available to every citizen, by virtue of State action. The three sub-indices that comprise it are urban infrastructure, human capital, and income and labor. Those sub-indices represent three large sets of assets, whose possession or deprivation determines the conditions of well-being of populations in contemporary societies. The index value ranges from 0 to 1, the closer to 1, the greater the social vulnerability of a region. Values between 0 and 0.200, indicate very low social vulnerability; between 0.201 and 0.300 indicate low social vulnerability; between 0.301 and 0.400 indicate moderate social vulnerability; between 0.401 and 0.500 indicate high social vulnerability; and between 0.501 and 1 indicate very high social vulnerability 13.
Epidemiological data concerning accumulated cases and confirmed deaths (per 100 thousand inhabitants) due to COVID-19 in each state were collected from the Brazilian government Health Ministry database, available online ¹. The data used in this research comprises information from February 25, 2020 (first case recorded in Brazil) to June 20, 2020.
The SDI was created to help mitigate the spread of COVID-19, since its launch, it has been improved with the sole objective of providing increasingly accurate data for public authorities and research institutes. To achieve the index, highly accurate geolocation data was treated with a distance algorithm. Polygons from all regions of the IBGE were adopted to ensure a more accurate categorization and more reliable data 14. Data is available on the Inloco website (https://mapabrasileirodacovid.inloco.com.br/pt/) displayed as a map and chart. SDI values are represented in percentual of social distancing, ranging from 0 to 100%.
Data were submitted to statistical analysis, all tests were applied considering an error of 5% and the confidence interval of 95%, and the analyzes were carried out using SPSS software version 23.0 (SPSS Inc. Chicago, IL, USA). As the hypothesis of normal distribution of data was not confirmed by the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, the statistical analysis was performed through the application of nonparametric tests. The strength of the association between distinct measures was tested with Spearman rank correlation. States in different groups according with SVI categorization were compared by Kruskal- Wallis test and post-hoc Dunn test. Multiple linear regressions were performed to verify whether GC or SVI were predictors of accumulated cases, confirmed deaths, and social distancing index in Brazilian states during COVID-19 outbreak.
For the period evaluated, the mean of accumulated cases and confirmed deaths per 100 thousand inhabitants in the Brazilian states was approximately 697 and 24, respectively. The states mean SDI score was 38.77%. Regarding the socioeconomic indicators, the mean values for the GC and SVI were, respectively, 0.495 and 0.261, as shown in table 1. The SVI values ranged from 0.134 to 0.374, thus none of the states presented high or very high social vulnerability.
The comparison among states with different social vulnerability indices found statistically significant differences in the number of deaths. States with very low social vulnerability presented fewer deaths per 100 thousand inhabitants due to COVID-19 than states with moderate social vulnerability, as shown in table 2.
The Spearman correlation test found a positive statistically significant correlation between the socioeconomic indicators and the three variables related to the COVID-19 outbreak in Brazil, except for the correlation between the GC and confirmed deaths (table 3).
The analysis of multiple linear regressions resulted in statistically significant models where the SVI was a predictor of accumulated cases, confirmed deaths, and social distancing index in Brazil during COVID-19 epidemic. Higher SVI, indicative of greater social vulnerability, was associated with higher accumulated cases (β = 0.409; t=2.243; p=0.034), confirmed deaths (β = 0.498; t=2.874; p=0.008), and social distancing index (β = 0.544; t=3.242; p=0.003). The values that describe these relationships are shown in table 4.
Health inequities are a worldwide issue 5. The COVID-19 pandemic can affect the whole of society, however, its repercussions will be experienced in different ways, depending on the level of equity that exists in each social reality 15. The findings of the present study support this statement since areas with different socioeconomic conditions are not being proportionally affected in Brazil.
The number of confirmed deaths due to COVID-19 presented a positive correlation with GC and SVI (table 3). In addition, states with moderate social vulnerability presented an average of 30 deaths per 100 thousand inhabitants more than states with very low social vulnerability (table 2). Furthermore, greater social vulnerability was a predictor of increase in deaths (table 4). These findings demonstrate the impact of socioeconomic vulnerability on COVID-19 mortality. Vulnerable communities are also disproportionately affected by preexisting chronic conditions. Studies carried out in Brazilian populations found that in areas with more marked poverty or inequality a higher prevalence of hypertension 16, diabetes 17, cancer 18, asthma 19, and multiple comorbidities20 were observed, those conditions represent an increased risk for severe COVID-19 health outcomes 21, 22. In addition, the availability of resources such as diagnostic tests, intensive care units, and health human resources are not equally distributed in the Brazilian territory ².
Risk communication is an integral element of any public health emergency response 23, however, vulnerable populations may not have the necessary language and literacy skills to understand and appropriately respond to pandemic messaging 15 because low health literacy is more prevalent among vulnerable populations 24. This may be associated with the difficulty to control the spread of COVID-19, particularly in regions of greater social vulnerability. In addition, lower sanitary standards, and the inability to maintain social distancing due to the need to leave home in search of work and income increase the exposure risk of people in social vulnerability. In the present study income inequality and social vulnerability showed a positive correlation with the cumulative cases of COVID-19 (table 3). SVI was a predictor of increased cases per 100 thousand inhabitants in Brazilian states (table 4). These findings support studies that alert to health inequalities during COVID-19 pandemic 5, 25.
Social distancing measures to control the spread of COVID-19 are likely to have large effects on health and health inequalities 26. Countries worldwide have implemented rigorous isolation measures in response to the pandemic. The aim of social distancing is to mitigate transmission by reducing close contact, however, the measures have profound socioeconomic and health consequences 26. In Brazil, according to the present investigation, the SDI is correlated to the socioeconomic status, as shown in table 3. In addition, greater social vulnerability was predictor of increased SDI in Brazilian states. Since socioeconomic disparities are an aggravating factor in the course of the health crisis, it is expected that, in response to higher rates of cases and deaths, as shown by the findings of the present study, more stricter measures of social distancing are implemented in more vulnerable areas.
Social distancing has led to a reduced workforce in all economic sectors and has caused job losses, resulting in income losses for workers unable to work and increased long-term unemployment if companies fail 26, 27. Isolation measures should be thoughtfully planned and executed, policymakers must consider its broader effects on health and health equity, otherwise, the decrease in income will exacerbate the pre- existing socioeconomic disparities, deepening the problems of local health inequity in epidemic areas 9, 28.
Besides the immediate health effects for the vulnerable populations, the pandemic will certainly have long-term socioeconomic impacts on less favored communities 9. The public health policy responses must ensure that considerations of health equity and social justice principles remain at the forefront of pandemic responses to ensure that the COVID-19 pandemic does not increase health inequalities for future generations 5.
The COVID-19 outcomes and SDI in Brazilian states are correlated to the socioeconomic condition. States with moderate social vulnerability presented more deaths per 100 thousand inhabitants than states with very low social vulnerability. SVI was a predictor of accumulated cases, confirmed deaths, and social distancing index in Brazilian states during COVID-19. Health authorities might apply these data on disease- control efforts, guiding interventions and resource allocations to improve outcomes in vulnerable communities.
The authors would like to thank the Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (CAPES) for scholarship granting.