Covid-19 is a respiratory disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus. The high rate 
of contagion and the spread of the virus in the population make the early detection of the 
pathogen the means for the adequate targeting of infection control measures. WHO directs 
sample collection on upper respiratory specimens, including nasopharyngeal and 
oropharyngeal swab or wash in ambulatory patients, as well as lower respiratory specimens: 
sputum and/or endotracheal aspirate or bronchoalveolar lavage, in addition to citing blood and 
feces. Among the various sample collection methods, saliva has been investigated and 
reported as a potential source for diagnosis. Thus, we propose to evaluate the current scenario, 
based on recent publications on the perspective of detecting SARS-CoV-2 in saliva as a 
diagnostic method for Covid-19. 

The coronavirus disease 2019 (Covid-19) is a respiratory disease considered a 
pandemic by the World Health Organization (WHO), caused by the severe acute respiratory 
syndrome-related coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), so designated by the International 
Committee of Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV), and initially named 2019 novel coronavirus 
(2019-nCoV). This new pathogen, characterized as an enveloped virus with a single-stranded 
RNA genome, belongs to the realm Riboviria, order Nidovirales, suborder Cornidovirineae, 
family Coronaviridae, genus Betacoronavirus and to the species of severe acute respiratory 
syndrome-related coronavirus [1,2,3]. Among the four existing genera of the coronavirus, 
Alpha- and Beta- are those that can infect mammals. It starts binding to host cells, and 
through the viral RNA replication process, it produces virions and releases by exocytosis for 
new infections. For this, structural proteins are needed for virion assembly, and the spike 
glycoprotein present on the virion surface is responsible for its binding to the host receptor. 
Thus, susceptibility to contagion, as well as the disease progression, can also be influenced by 
aspects of the host itself [4]. 

According to WHO, laboratory tests in suspected cases should be performed using  
samples collected from the  upper respiratory tract, such as nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal 
swab or wash in ambulatory patients, as well as lower respiratory specimens: sputum and/or 
endotracheal aspirate or bronchoalveolar lavage in patients with severe respiratory disease, in 
addition to blood, feces, and urine [5]. However, these diagnostic methods have some 
disadvantages, such as patient discomfort and bleeding or coughing may occasionally occur, 
risk of contamination by healthcare professionals, the need for specific equipment, in addition 
to the limitation of sputum samples, since they are rarely present [1,6]. 

Saliva has been reported as a non-invasive method, with significant advantages, such 
as lower cost, easy-to-obtain sample, the possibility of self-collection, lower risk of 
contamination, in addition there is no need for trained staff for sample collection [1]. The high 
rate of contagion and the spread of the virus in the population make the early pathogen 
detection he most effective mean for the adequate targeting of infection control measures. 
Among the various sample collection methods, saliva has been reported as a potential source 
for diagnosis. Thus, we propose to evaluate the current scenario, based on recent publications 
on the perspective of detecting SARS-CoV-2 in saliva as a diagnostic method for Covid-19. 

Nasopharyngeal samples are the most effective samples for identify viruses that cause 
respiratory tract infection, being used both for diagnosis and in research as a comparative 
method with saliva [7,8]. 

Previously to the Covid-19 pandemic, saliva was already the focus of research to use it 
for diagnostic purposes in respiratory infections. In 2004, faced with a lack of knowledge 
about SARS-associated coronavirus (SARS-CoV) in oral droplets, researchers at the 
University of Taiwan examined samples of throat wash and saliva from patients considered 
suspect, using the quantitative real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-
PCR) assay, and verified the presence of SARS-CoV RNA in all available specimens, and 
saliva presented the highest amount of virus RNA. Also, the immunofluorescence assay was 
able to detect the pathogen in epithelial cells from the throat wash and this could lead to 
dissemination to the oropharynx and oral cavity after viral replication. Thus, despite the 
limitations of the study concerning the sample size, they supported the indication of these 
samples as a diagnostic method for SARS-CoV-2, also because they were able to detect the 
presence of the virus in early samples even before the appearance of lung lesions, suggesting 
transmission by oral droplets by asymptomatic patients [9]. 

In the face of respiratory virus infections, previous studies have demonstrated the 
effectiveness of saliva in identifying these viral agents, with a high agreement with 
nasopharyngeal samples [7,8,9]. This method of collecting respiratory viruses was evaluated 
in two cohorts to observe the distinction between the viral loads of nasopharyngeal and saliva 
specimens. The detection rate for the first result was 91.8% and the second 57.1% for saliva. 
However, the reevaluation of patients who tested negative for the nasopharynx obtained a 
positive result for the saliva of nine patients without identification in the nasopharynx, which 
could significantly affect the infection control measures. Thus, saliva should be considered as 
a diagnostic method [7]. 

The diagnostic validity of saliva demonstrated a 93% equivalence between the results 
in the identification of respiratory viruses, influenza, and respiratory syncytial virus, between 
saliva and nasopharyngeal aspirate, with 90.8% sensitivity and 100% specificity for saliva. 
Saliva data on time and cost were also assessed and were 2.26 times faster and 2.59 times 
cheaper. And so, a possible way to be performed not only in diagnosis, but also in research 
[8]. 

The literature exposes the affinity of SARS-CoV-2 to the angiotensin converting 
enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor present in the host cell membrane, which can bind through a layer 
of proteins that surrounds it, which helps this connection facilitating their entry into human 
cells [3,10]. Thus, the expression of this receptor in cells can drive the possible pathways for 
the virus to enter the human body. The expression of ACE2 in the epithelial cells of the 
salivary gland has been confirmed and this makes them liable to be infected by SARS-CoV-2, 
even though they are present in a smaller amount compared to other tissues, such as 
gastrointestinal system and renal and cardiac muscles. This result allows the identification of 
the virus in saliva, with a potential risk of transmission [4]. 

The analysis of public bulk-seq RNA datasets, in different tissues that express ACE2, 
showed that ACE2 is highly expressed in the oral mucosa, with the greatest expression in the 
oral tongue, floor of mouth, base of tongue, and among cells, epithelial cells, T cells, and 
fibroblasts. Moreover, minor salivary glands express higher levels of ACE2 than that in the 
lungs, suggesting that the oral cavity is very susceptible to infection acting as potential target 
for the virus, and the salivary gland could be a major source of the virus in saliva. The 
identification of SARS-CoV-2 contamination pathways in the human body helps to 
understand the pathogenesis of the disease and provides support for prevention. However, the 
absence of a histological assessment is a limitation for these assessments [11,12]. 
Transmission occurs between humans normally through infected respiratory droplets, 
aerosols, sneezing or coughing, in direct contact with contaminated surfaces with the mouth, 
nose, or conjunctiva of the eyes [10]. 

In this sense, saliva presents a risk of transmission to dentists and other health 
professionals, since salivary samples may contain the virus in the process of replication, 
possibly its contagion configuration. Thereby, there is the possibility of being a diagnostic 
means for early detection of SARS-CoV-2, and it has also become a path for the use of 
proteomics, metabolomics, and antibody detection [13,14]. 

With the emergence of SARS-CoV-2, because of the simplicity of acquiring the 
samples added to all the advantages concerning the reduction of the possibility of contagion 
of health professionals, already described and supported in previous studies, the diagnosis 
through saliva made even more relevant in the current scenario and new studies have emerged 
to evaluate this method. To et al (2020) [6] detected SARS-CoV-2 in 91.7%, corresponding to 
11 out of 12 patients evaluated, and argued in their study that saliva is a means of 
transmission in the positive test case for viral culture, since it can be expelled through 
droplets, in cough or even in cases with no respiratory symptoms. This could indicate the 
possibility of infection of the salivary gland, although they emphasize the diversity of saliva 
composition, which also consists of secretions from the nasopharynx or lung. 

However, a discussion about the probability of identifying SARS-CoV-2 in saliva 
stated that the interpretation of the results of the study mentioned above could not be 
extrapolated through the statement that this method would result in the identification of the 
virus in 90% of infected patients, but detection of approximately 60% to 99%, due to the 
small number of individuals tested. However, they recognize the relevance of the data and the 
need to continue studies with a larger sample size so that it is possible to resolve the questions 
about the sensitivity of this diagnostic method [15]. 

The diagnostic method through saliva is exposed in a very advantageous way, and 
research is constant to confirm the detection of the virus in saliva. With that, it is possible to 
observe that there must be a comparison of the results found in the tests with the diagnoses 
established by laboratories and confirmed through already established collections, such as 
nasopharyngeal rRT-PCR swabs. The Polymerase Chain Reaction with real-time reverse 
transcription (rRT-PCR) is the main test in identifying SARS-CoV-2 [16]. 

Azzi et al, (2020) [16] performed collection through the drooling technique of 25 
patients, due to the possibility of collecting only oral fluids instead of mucous secretions from 
the oropharynx or lower respiratory tract. Two hypotheses arose regarding the identification 
of the virus in saliva, the possible migration of the virus from the nasopharynx or the 
respiratory tract, or through the secretion of the salivary glands. Also, they affirmed the 
reliability of saliva in detecting SARS-CoV-2 and the possibility of using it in a rapid test, in 
addition to acquiring viral load in asymptomatic patients, to verify a threshold in the 
sensitivity of the test. 

In a recent study evaluating the SARS-CoV-2 viral load of 23 patients with Covid-19, 
using self-collected posterior oropharyngeal saliva samples, 87% had the virus detectable in 
their saliva, in addition to reporting this viral load in the first week after the onset of 
symptoms and subsequent decline over time, as well as checking the presence of viral RNA in 
these same samples for more than 20 days in 7 patients. This implies that this type of sample 
allows its use both for the initial diagnosis and for monitoring the SARS-CoV-2 viral load. A 
possible relation was also observed between the high viral load detected after the onset of 
symptoms and the transmission of the disease during this period, regardless of the severity of 
the symptoms [17]. 

Differently, Chen et al. associated the presence of the virus in saliva with the severe 
form of the disease, in which, through the collection directly from the salivary glands as a 
way to obtain exclusively saliva samples, obtained a positive result of 12.90% of the patients, 
3 of whom were very weak, indicating greater severity of the disease in cases of the presence 
of SARS-CoV-2 in the saliva from the salivary glands [4]. 

The possibility of releasing the virus after remission of symptoms makes it important 
to monitor the viral load, as well as the profile of antibodies, as they may not be directly 
proportional, and this may be relevant in cases not detectable by RT-PCR due to low viral 
load, in which the serological diagnosis would indicate the serum amount of IgG or IgM 
antibodies [17]. Zhang et al. evaluated oral swabs in the detection of the virus during the onset 
of the disease and did not consider it as a diagnostic method since negative results do not 
exclude the presence of the virus, and with that, serological tests, IgG and IgM would be 
indicated to confirm the infection [18]. 

Recently, an evaluation of 39 patients positive for PCR, 33 were identified with 
SARC-CoV-2 in saliva, affirming the viability of saliva as a non-invasive diagnostic method, 
useful for carrying out screening, due to the low cost, and the lack of adequate individual 
protective equipment for the collection of nasopharyngeal aspirates, restricting them to highly 
suspect patients [19]. 

The method of collecting saliva is quite different among the studies evaluated. 
Although all studies evaluate saliva samples, the variations in the collection technique 
between them make them quite different in terms of the data found. The techniques of cough 
out saliva from throat, expectorated saliva, drooling technique or use of a pipette, saliva 
collected directly from the salivary gland, as well as the place where the samples were 
collected, from the deep throat, oral cavity or salivary glands [4,6,16]. 

These differences in the collection differ in the composition of the evaluated saliva, 
and consequently in the detection of the virus in the sample. Depending on the technique 
used, there may be a mixture of saliva and secretions from the nasopharynx and the lower 
respiratory tract and thus interfere in the interpretation of the results, since it is not possible to 
distinguish whether the virus comes from the salivary glands, nasopharynx or tract lower 
respiratory system. Some studies bring this information as a limitation [17] or use the 
technique for the acquisition of saliva only [4], others cite it as an advantage since regardless 
of the origin or composition, it can increase the detection of the virus without promoting 
discomfort to the patient [6]. 

Regardless of the collection method, all the studies evaluated emphasized the benefits 
of this diagnosis, which can be performed without specialized collection equipment. 
According to the results of the studies, and evaluating the possibility of detecting the virus in 
these different samples, the suggestion is that the saliva from the deep throat presents a 
greater possibility of identifying the virus, and consequently capable of diagnosing the disease 
early [12]. Moreover, a study comparing SARS-CoV-2 detection in nasopharyngeal and 
saliva samples from confirmed COVID-19 patients, have demonstrated that the sensitivity of 
SARS-CoV-2 detection from saliva would be comparable to nasopharyngeal swabs in early 
hospitalization and would be more consistent during extended period of hospitalization [20]. 

There is unanimity in the possibility of detecting SARS-CoV-2 in saliva, although 
there is no parameter for the collection technique in the researches. So far, the detection of 
SARS-CoV-2 through saliva seems to be very promising, although obstacles such as the 
technique and the location of the collection and the sample size of the research carried out so 
far may present a limitation for its use. As a diagnostic method, and with all the advantages 
presented, saliva as an isolated diagnostic method is not yet fully supported and must be 
associated with other methods for confirmation. 

The current scenario presents saliva as a reliable method for the detection of SARS-
CoV-2, due to the ease of obtaining the samples, the possibility of self-collection, low cost 
because there is no need to use specific equipment, in addition to reducing the risk of 
transmission for health professionals [1,6]. The studies that evaluated saliva showed good 
agreement with the gold standard used, aspirated nasopharyngeal, with the potential to replace 
other biological samples used. However, this sample collection tool has not been 
recommended by the WHO to date. 
