(Porotrichum squarrosum (Arzeni) H.A. Crum & Steere a new record to Brazil). 
Porotrichum squarrosum has never been reported from Brazil and it is a new record. While 
revising herbarium specimens we found a specimen named Pireella squarrosa (currently  
Porotrichum), identified by Massimo Mastracci. We have compared this specimen with records 
from literature and several hundreds of specimens and found that among specimens previously 
determined as P. substriatum several belong to P. squarrosum. These taxa are a quite common in 
Brazil ranging from Amazon, Atlantic Forest to Cerrado phytogeographical domains at 
elevations from near sea level to about 600 m. These taxa are fast differentiated by the squarrose 
leaves, spur costa at back and absence of stem central strand in P. squarrosum against to 
complanate leaves, without spurowed costa at back and presence of central strand in P. 
substriatum. 

While revising specimens for the Brazilian Flora online from online databases (Peralta 
2019), we found a specimen named Pireella squarrosa Arzeni (nowadays,  Porotrichum 
squarrosum), identified by Massimo Mastracci. 

Porotrichum squarrosum has never been reported from Brazil in literature and is 
presented here as a new record. We checked several hundreds of unidentified specimens of 
Neckeraceae and found that P. squarrosum is quite common in Brazil ranging from Amazon, 
Atlantic Forest to Cerrado phytogeographical domains at elevations from near sea level to about 
600 m.  

Plants of this species were found in herbaria determined as Porotrichum substriatum 
(Hampe) Mitt., probably because of the synonymization proposed by Buck (1998). These species  
are  distinguished by the concave and widely spreading to squarrose leaves of P. squarrosum 
(even on dry plants), spur costa at back and absence of stem central strand whereas P. 
substriatum has clearly plane and complanate leaves which are usually obliquely spreading (see 
the type at https://plants.jstor.org/stable/viewer/10.5555/al.ap.specimen.bm000961357), absence 
of spur costa at back and presence of stem central strand; plates of both species will be soon 
available at FBO (2020). 

The revision of Neckeraceae family of Sastre de Jesús (1987) does not include the name 
Porotrichum squarrosum (a combination of Crum & Steere 1958 on Pireella squarrosa by 
Arzeni 1954). The original publication does not include the description of the pseudoparaphyllia. 
The genus Pireella belongs to Pterobryaceae and the pseudoparaphyllia in this family are always 
filamentose (Allen 1987), but Porotrichum and all family Neckeraceae has the characteristic 
foliose pseudoparaphyllia (Sastre de Jesús 1987). 

Porotrichum squarrosum has been described from Haiti and the Dominican Republic by 
Arzeni (1954, with pl. 20, as Pireella) with only one further specimen from Haiti was reported 
by Crum & Steere (1958, with figures 62-83). But after the synonymization proposed by Buck 
(1998) these names are never re-evaluated, even with the absence of specimens or types 
examined by this author. Our new records are the first ones from Brazil and we encourage the 
revision of  specimens determined as P. substriatum to reveal the real range of this taxon. 

In light of misinterpretation of the specimens examined we provide a description and 
pictures for this taxon and stimulating the reanalysis of preexisting herbaria specimens. 

Additional illustrations and descriptions in Arzeni (1954) and Crum & Steere (1958).  

Plants gregarious, pale-green or partly brownish, dull, stipitate-frondose, mostly 2–4 cm 
tall. Stolons creeping, with small ovate-acuminate leaves and tufts of smooth, brownish-orange, 
densely branched rhizoids in the contact with the substratum; stolons transforming 
heteroblastically into stems consisting of a proximal, unbranched stipe and a distal, branched 
frond. Fronds irregular-pinnately branched, complanate. Stipe distinct, green, in cross section 
with a cortex consisting of 5–8 layers of very thick-walled cells grading into larger medullary 
cells with thinner walls; central strand present. Stipe leaves few, spaced, from a wide base 
narrowed at 3/4 of leaf length into an acute acumen, ca. 0.5 × 0.6 mm; margins recurved from 
base of leaf to base of acumen, entire; costa distinct, tapering and vanishing in lower part of 
acumen. Stem leaves plane when dry, not complanate, symmetric or nearly so, erect-spreading, 
imbricate, often somewhat concave, keeled by costa, ca. 1.0–1.2 × 0.5–0.6 mm, apex acute or 
obtuse and mucronate; margins plane to slightly recurved in lower half of leaf, entire near base, 
becoming serrulate upwards, in upper half of leaf serrate by distinct, uni- or bicellular teeth; 
costa strong, single, reaching to 9/10 of leaf length, spur and/or spinose above. Leaf cells 
smooth, prorulose, walls eporose; apical laminal cells fairly thick-walled, mostly long hexagonal, 
sometimes sinuose, 8–10 × 3–4 µm, median laminal cells thinner-walled, fusiform to irregularly 
penta- or hexagonal, 10–14 × 5–8 µm, basal laminal cells and marginal cells similar to the 
median; alar cells fairly distinct, thick-walled, subquadrate or subrounded to irregularly angular, 
shorter than basal laminal cells. Pseudoparaphyllia few, foliose, somewhat asymmetrically 
lanceolate, to 0.4 mm long. Dioicous. Perigonia bud-like, on stems; ca. 1.1 mm long, faintly 
costate, lancelate, above midleaf narrowed to a lanceolate-acuminate tip; paraphyses hyaline, 
uniseriate, filiform. Perichaetia not seen. Sporophyte not seen. 

The specimens were identified using the illustrations and descriptions of the original 
publication by Arzeni (1954) and Crum & Steere (1958). 

There are three other records of Porotrichum squarrosum on the repositories of  GBIF  
(2019) and this one includes the indication to be a synonym of Porotrichum substriatum, but as 
we indicate above we consider these taxa to be different. 
The specimens examined are from the States of Amazonas, Goiás, Mato Grosso, Minas 
Gerais, Pará, São Paulo (figure 2) ranging from Amazon, Atlantic Forest to Cerrado 
phytogeographical domains at elevations from near sea level to about 600 m in Brazil. 

We are grateful to M. Mastracci who drew our attention to Porotrichum squarrosum. 
